
ARTICLE 47
Proressor Dr MoHaAMeEn S. ABDEL WaHAB7?®

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the cir-
cumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which should be taken

to preserve the respective rights of either party.

1. INTRODUCTION

Provisional or interim measures are protective, conservatory, interlocutory, preliminary
or precautionary relief that may be requested, on urgent basis, in the course of pend-
ing arbitral proceedings to maintain certain status guo and/or protect substantive or
procedural rights and interests of the parties pending a final resolution of the existing
dispute, and provided that the conditions required for granting such measures are ful-
filled. Obviously, an arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction to grant interim or provisional relief
is derived from the parties’ direct agreement, the applicable procedural rules and/or the

governing /ex loci arbitri.

As is the case with the overwhelming majority of institutional arbitration rules, the
ICSID rules, including the newly proposed amendments of 2018,”? empower arbitral

entered into an agreement wherein they expressly consented to jurisdiction over Ecuador's counterclaims. Accordingly,
the tribunal was not required to enter into a discussion of its jurisdiction over the counterclaims. Second, although
Ecuador counterclaimed for a total amount of US$2.8 billion, only US$41 million was granted by the tribunal.
728 ‘The author wishes to thank Nada Gadallah, junior associate at Zulficar & Partners Law Firm, who provided assistance
with the research, compilation of the reviewed decisions and the preparation of a preliminary draft of the commentary.
729 ICSID Secretariat, ‘Proposals for Amendment of the ICSID Rules — Consolidated Draft Rules’ (Volume 2), 2 August
2018 <https://icsid worldbank.org/en/Documents/Amendments_Vol_Two.pdf> (accessed 27 August 2018).

ARTICLE 47

tribunals to grant interim or provisional relief. Interim or provisional relief has been
labelled as provisional, protective, conservatory, interlocutory, preliminary or precau-
tionary (collectively referred to as ‘Provisional Measures’ or ‘PM(s)’) depending on the

applicable rules and/or prevailing doctrinal views.”

That said the focus of this commentary is PMs in the context of investment arbitration
proceedings administered under the auspices of the International Centre for the Settle-
ment of Investment Disputes (ICSID”) and pursuant to the ICSID rules.

For the purpose of this commentary, no less than 120 ICSID decisions, 540 provisional
measures applications”! and 400 related documents have been considered (collectively
referred to as the ‘Reviewed Documents’), in addition to the relevant scholarly writings

and references.

2. PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN CONTEXT: NATURE AND SCOPE

A. The nature of PMs under the ICSID System

The provision governing PMs in the ICSID system is enshrined in Article 47 of the
ICSID Convention (‘Article 47’) which reads:

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the cir-
cumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which should be taken to
preserve the respective rights of either party.

This provision is inspired by Article 41 of the Statute of the International Court of Jus-
tice’? (the ‘ICJ’).”* This provision provided the legal framework but did not specify the

730 For the purposes of this commentary, ‘provisional measures’ will be uniformly used to denote the diverse PMs that have
been considered, awarded or denied by arbitral tribunals under the ICSID system and rules. Whilst some authors have
attempted to draw distinctions between the different terms used to denote PMs, others have opposed any distinction
that lacks basis or precision. See Frederico Lenci, Provisional Measures in International Investment Arbitration (Uni-
vesita Degli Studi Di Milano 2014) 32.

731 For accuracy, out of the 540 PM applications there are 57 PMs that were not available for review, hence all statistics
provided herein will be based on the remaining 483 PMs that were considered and reviewed.

732 Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, CSTD Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on Provi-
sional Measures (25 September 2001).

733 Schreuer and others (n 3) 759; Article 41(1) of the ICJ Statute reads as follows: “The Court shall have the power to
indicate, if it considers that circumstances as so require, any provisional measures which ought to be taken to preserve
the respective rights of either party. In Border Timbers Limited, Timber Products International (Private) Limited, and
Hangani Development Co. (Private) Limited v. Republic of Zimbabwe, \CSID Case No. ARB/10/25, Procedural Order
No. 5 (3 April 2016), the arbitral tribunal, stated: ‘It is well established that Article 47 of the Convention is based on
Article 41(1) of the ICJ Statute. It is also well established that an ICSID tribunal may, in certain circumstances, have

recourse to the jurisprudence of the ICJ for guidance.’

433

4.483

4,484

4.485

4.486


4.487

4.488

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

types of measures which may be granted and the conditions that must be fulfilled. This
has led ICSID tribunals to rely, in the first instance, on the jurisprudence of the ICJ to
guide them in deciding on PMs requests.”* However, as demonstrated below, ICSID
tribunals do not seem to have adopted a uniform approach when examining requests
for PMs.’*

It is worth noting that PMs under Article 47 are distinct from: (i) ‘the stay of enforce-
ment of an award pending a decision on its interpretation under Article 50(2) of the
Convention; (ii) ‘revisions under Article 51(4) of the Convention; and (iii) ‘annulment’
under Article 52(5) of the Convention, which provide for other measures under the
ICSID Convention.”° However, it should be noted that there is no express prohibition

restraining ICSID tribunals from granting PMs under Article 47 in annulment pro-
737

ceedings or any other ICSID proceedings.

Article 47 of the Convention is further supplemented by ICSID Arbitration Rule 39
(‘Rule 39’), providing the procedural framework of PMs. More specifically, Rule 39

reads:

(1) At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party may request that provi-
sional measures for the preservation of its rights be recommended by the Tribunal. The
request shall specify the rights to be preserved, the measures the recommendation of
which is requested, and the circumstances that require such measures.

(2) The Tribunal shall give priority to the consideration of a request made pursuant to
paragraph (1).

(3) The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on its own initiative or
recommend measures other than those specified in a request. It may at any time modify
or revoke its recommendations.

(4) The Tribunal shall only recommend provisional measures, or modify or revoke its
recommendations, after giving each party an opportunity of presenting its observations.
(5) Ifa party makes a request pursuant to paragraph (1) before the constitution of the
Tribunal, the Secretary-General shall, on the application of either party, fix time limits

734 City Oriente Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), 1CSID Case No.
ARB/06/21, Decision on Provisional Measures (19 November 2007) citing the cases of Electricity Company of So-
fia - Belgium v. Bulgaria, judgment, PCI (Ser. A/B, No. 79, 4 April 1939); LaGrand - Germany v. U.S.A. LaGrand,
judgment, IC] (27 June 2001). See also Perenco Ecuador Limited v. Republic of Ecuador, CSTD Case No. ARB/08/6,
Decision on Provisional Measures (8 May 2009), citing Electricity Company of Sofia — Belgium v. Bulgaria, judgment,
PCT] (Ser. A/B, No. 79, 4 April 1939); LaGrand— Germany v. U.S.A. LaGrand, judgment, ICJ (27 June 2001) para. 103,
see Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. United Kingdom v. Iran, Interim Protection Order, ICJ Reports 1951 (5 July 1951), 93; Armed
Activities on the Territory of the Congo (Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Uganda), judgment, ICJ (19 December 2005).

735 Aurélia Antonietti, ‘Le CIRDI et les mesures conservatoires: récentes experiences’ [2005] 7 International Law FO-
RUM du droit international 42.

736 Schreuer and others (n 3) 760.

737 Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (opened for
signature 18 March 1965, entered into force 14 October 1966) (ICSID Conventior).

434

ARTICLE 47

for the parties to present observations on the request, so that the request and observa-
tions may be considered by the Tribunal promptly upon its constitution.

(6) Nothing in this Rule shall prevent the parties, provided that they have so stipulated
in the agreement recording their consent, from requesting any judicial or other author-
ity to order provisional measures, prior to or after the institution of the proceeding, for
the preservation of their respective rights and interests.’

Rule 39 was amended on 10 April 2006, through the modification of the first paragraph
and insertion of a new paragraph now under Rule 39(5), to allow a party seeking PMs
to introduce his related request at any time after the commencement of the arbitral
proceedings and even Jefore the constitution of the arbitral tribunal itself. In this latter

case, such a request is to be examined as soon as the arbitral tribunal is constituted.”*

On the nature of the PMs to be considered, the arbitral tribunal in Perenco v. Ecuador
held that:

Article 47 and Rule 39 recognise that the rights which a party asserts and seeks to
preserve and protect in an arbitral proceeding may be effectively destroyed or seriously
prejudiced by the action of the other party taken before a Tribunal is able to reach a final
decision on the merits of the dispute between them. Thus power is conferred on the

Tribunal to restrain such action in order to preserve the effectiveness and integrity of

the proceeding and avoid severe aggravation of the dispute.”

It is worth noting that Article 46 of the Additional Facility Arbitration Rules (the ‘AF
Rules’) contains similar but not identical provisions to those in the aforementioned
Rule 39 of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the ‘Arbitration Rules’).
A noticeable difference between Article 46 of the AF Rules and Rule 39 of the Arbi-
tration Rules is the wording providing that a party may request that PMs be ‘ordered’
instead of ‘recommended’ by the arbitral tribunal.

In addition, since PMs do not generally have a res judicata effect, owing to their provi-
sional or temporary nature, PMs can indeed be modified, withdrawn and/or terminated
upon request of the parties or by the arbitral tribunal in accordance with Rule 39(3) of
the Arbitration Rules, especially when the circumstances warranting them change or
disappear, as in the case when the arbitral tribunal finds, at a later stage, that it lacks

738 The arbitral tribunal in Railroad Development v. Guatemala affirmed that the ICSID Convention is ‘clear in stating
that the power of the Tribunal to grant provisional measures is not limited to any particular phase of a proceeding’.
See Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, CSTD Case No. ARB/07/23, Decision on Provisional
Measures (15 October 2008).

739 Perenco(n 734) para. 55, p.25.

435

4.489

4.490

4.491

4.492


4.493

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

jurisdiction to hear the dispute,

740

discontinuance of the proceedings in accordance with Rules 43—45.”"1

Most recently in 2018,’” the ICSID proposed certain significant amendments to the
rules, including the Arbitration Rules, and the newly proposed provision (renumbered as

Rule 50 instead of Rule 39) reads as follows:

Rule 50
Provisional Measures

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
(6)

740 See Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, CSTD Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on

A party may at any time request that the Tribunal recommend provisional meas-

ures to preserve that party’s rights, including measures to:

(a) prevent action that is likely to cause:

(i) current or imminent harm to the other party; or
(ii) prejudice to the arbitral process;

(b) maintain or restore the status quo pending determination of the dispute; and

(c) preserve evidence that may be relevant to the resolution of the dispute.

The following procedure shall apply:

(a) the request shall specify the rights to be preserved, the measures requested,
and the circumstances that require such measures;

(b) the Tribunal shall fix time limits for written or oral submissions, as required,
or the request;

(c) ifa party requests provisional measures before the constitution of the Tribu-
nal, the Secretary-General shall fix time limits for written submissions on
the request, so that the Tribunal may consider the request promptly upon its
constitution; and

(d) the Tribunal shall issue its decision on the request within 30 days after the
latest of:

(i) the constitution of the Tribunal;
(ii) the last written submission on the request; or
(iii) the last oral submission on the request.

In deciding whether to recommend provisional measures, the Tribunal shall con-

sider all relevant circumstances. The Tribunal shall only recommend provisional

measures if it determines that they are urgent and necessary.

The Tribunal may recommend provisional measures on its own initiative. The Tri-

bunal may also recommend provisional measures different from those requested

by a party.

A party must promptly disclose any material change in the circumstances upon

which the Tribunal recommended provisional measures.

The Tribunal may at any time modify or revoke the provisional measures, on its

own initiative or upon a party’s request.

Provisional Measures (25 September 2001) para. 14.
741 See Schreuer and others (n 3) 775.
742 See ICSID Secretariat, Proposals for Amendment of the ICSID Rules — Consolidated Draft Rules (n 729).

436


or once an arbitral tribunal renders an order on the
ARTICLE 47

(7) A party may request any judicial or other authority to order provisional measures
if such recourse is available in the instrument recording the parties’ consent to
arbitration.

This very recently proposed amendments introduce several notable changes to the cur-

rent scheme and highlight certain new amendments to the provision are:

(a) introducing a time limit for the arbitral tribunal to examine and decide on the re-
quest for PMs;

(b) allowing the parties to resort to domestic courts to demand provisional measures
without fear of being in violation of Article 26 regarding the exclusivity of the
ICSID arbitration, insofar as such recourse is available in the instrument recording
the parties’ consent to arbitration;

(c) referring explicitly and exclusively to the requirements of urgency and necessity; and

(d) introducing a non-exhaustive list of grounds for granting PMs, with express refer-
ence to a ‘current or imminent harm’, which puts an end to the heated debate over

whether PMs could be granted to protect a ‘contingent’ right or not.
B. Timing of PMs requests

The temporary nature of PMs is justified by the urgency and necessity requirements,
and, as such, they must receive priority attention and be addressed expeditiously. None-
theless, PMs should not prejudge or prejudice any issues of jurisdiction and/or the

merits.

As mentioned above, under the latest version of Rule 39(1) a party may request PMs at
any time af or after commencement of the proceedings. An example of this is the case
of Helnan v. Egypt’® and Nova Group v. Romania,’ where the claimants submitted the

request for arbitration inclusive of the request for a number of provisional measures.’”

It is worth noting that many arbitral institutions have instituted special procedures to

appoint emergency arbitrators to determine PM requests well before the constitution

743 Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSTD Case No. ARB/05/19, Decision on Claimant’s Re-
quest for Provisional Measures (17 May 2006).

744 Nova Group Investments, B.V. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/16/19, Procedural Order No. 7 (17 March 2017).

745 See also the cases of Gabriel Resources Ltd. and Gabriel Resources (Jersey) Ltd. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/31,
Procedural Order No. 2 (20 October 2016); Phoenix Action Lid v. Czech Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Deci-
sion on Provisional Measures (06 April 2007); and Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and
Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Provisional Measures (17 August
2007).

437

4,494

4.495

4.496

4.497


4.498

4.499

4.500

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

of the arbitral tribunal.” However, this goes beyond the purposes of the present com-

mentary which focuses on ICSID rules.

Once constituted, an arbitral tribunal must consider several options in dealing with
requests for PMs, including: convening a special hearing or issuing an emergency tem-
porary order pending the filing of both parties’ positions and the examination of the re-
quested PMs,’or granting or denying the requested PMs on expedited basis, without a

hearing and upon deliberations between all members of the arbitral tribunal.’

By way of illustration, in Rizzani and others v. Kuwait’ the claimant expressed in
their arbitration request their intent to file a request for provisional measures which
was already submitted before the constitution of the tribunal. The Secretary-General of
ICSID decided a briefing schedule to allow both parties to express their observations.
Shortly thereafter, the respondent filed their provisional measures request for which the
Secretary-General of ICSID also decided a briefing schedule. Upon its constitution,
the arbitral tribunal amended the briefing schedules and set a hearing for the provi-

sional measures applications.

Whilst PMs can be requested at any time, tardiness in submitting PM requests could

50 the claimant

adversely impact their consideration. In Teinver and others v. Argentina,
submitted the PMs request after both parties submitted their post-hearing briefs and
filed their costs submissions. The claimant requested certain provisional measures”!
and made further requests on merits.” In denying the PM request, the arbitral tri-
bunal noted that all procedural steps in this arbitration had been completed and the
only remaining step is the closure of proceedings and the issuance of the award, which
‘distinguishes the circumstances of this case from those in the other arbitral decisions
brought to the Tribunal’s attention and reduces the aspects of the arbitration in respect

of which provisional measures can be sought’.

746 See Article 29 of the ICC Rules (2017), Schedule 4 annexed to the HKIAC Rules (2013), Schedule 1 annexed to the
SIAC Rules (2016), Appendix IT to the SCC Rules 2017, Rules 71 & 72 of the JCAA Rules (2015), Article 43 of the
SRIA Rules (2012), Article R-38 of the AAA Rules (2013), Appendix HI to the CIETAC Rules 2015.

747 See Section 5.K below.

748 See Schreuer and others (n 3) 769.

749 Rizzani de Eccher §.p.A., Obrascén Huarte Lain S.A. and Trevi S.p.A. v. State of Kuwait, (CSTD Case No. ARB/17/8,
Decision on Provisional Measures (23 November 2017).

750 Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercantas 8.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. Argentine Republic, CSTD Case No.
ARB/09/1, Decision on Provisional Measures (8 April 2016).

751. ibid.

752. ibid.

753. ibid. Decision on Provisional Measures (8 April 2016), para. 191, p. 73.

438

ARTICLE 47

In Pey Casado v. Chile,’* the tribunal discussed the precedence of PMs over any other
issue, even the tribunal’s own jurisdiction, and stated that “These measures must there-
fore be able to be ... recommended ... at any stage of the procedures and therefore also
before the Arbitral Tribunal has been able to rule on any objections to its jurisdiction or
the admissibility of the claim on the merits’.

However, it is worth noting that the temporal gap between the submission of PMs
requests and the determination thereof by the arbitral tribunal is growing bigger due to
many reasons. First, parties are exceedingly drawn to extensive written observations and
rebuttals in relation to PMs. Second, arbitral tribunals are increasingly inclined to hold

a hearing on PMs prior to the determination thereof.

To overcome this temporal gap challenge, and to avert the prejudice in delaying the
determination of PMs, ICSID arbitral tribunals developed a mechanism for granting
‘Emergency Temporary Orders’, as detailed below,” where the parties are required to

maintain the sfatus guo unchanged pending the decision on PMs requests.
C. Requesting and/or recommending PMs

In principle, PMs are considered and granted based on a request by one of the parties.
Under the ICSID Convention, parties may either (i) exclude the possibility/jurisdic-
tion for the tribunal to grant PMs; or (ii) limit the power of the tribunal to grant PMs
as the circumstances under which they may be recommended and/or the types of meas-
ures, which are permissible, are concerned. In Maffezini v. Spain, the arbitral tribunal
noted that ‘the imposition of a provisional measure is an extraordinary measure’, and
further asserted that the party requesting the PMs ‘has the burden to demonstrate why
the Tribunal should grant its application’.”*°

However, the initiative to recommend or order PMs may come from the arbitral tri-
bunal itself. As mentioned above, Rule 39(3) of the ICISD Rules explicitly contem-
plates that an arbitral tribunal may recommend PMs at its own initiative. However, in
most cases the initiative comes from an interested party rather than the arbitral tribunal

754 See Victor Pey Casado (n 740).

755 See Section 5.K below.

756 Emilio Agustin Maffexini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSTD Case No. ARB/97/7, Procedural Order No. 2 (28 October 1999)
para. 10, p. 3.

439

4.501

4.502

4.503

4.504

4.505


4.506

4.507

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

itself.’ In Perenco v. Ecuador,’® the arbitral tribunal granted the claimant’s PMs re-
quest that impairs Ecuador from collecting an enhanced payment required under a
newly enacted law. However, in order to strike a balance between the rights and inter-
ests of both parties, the arbitral tribunal — at its own initiative — ordered the claimant
to deposit the sums due according to the aforementioned law in an escrow account as a
means of securing the respondent’s contingent right.

3. THE JURISDICTION AND THE POWER TO ORDER PMS
A. The jurisdiction to order PMs

It is agreed amongst the vast majority of ICSID tribunals that an arbitral tribunal must
have prima facie jurisdiction over the dispute in order to grant provisional measures.”
The party requesting PMs is under an obligation to establish the arbitral tribunal’s ju-
risdiction to consider and grant such PMs. However, certain exceptions to this rule may

exist in certain circumstances as detailed below.””

In Burlington Resources v. Ecuador,” the arbitral tribunal noted that ‘[I]|t is undisputed
by the Parties that the Arbitral Tribunal has the power to order provisional measures
prior to ruling on its jurisdiction. The Tribunal will not exercise such power, howev-
er, unless there is a prima facie basis for jurisdiction’. In Quiborax and Non-Metallic v.

Bolivia,’

although jurisdiction was not disputed, the arbitral tribunal established its
jurisdiction through asserting all elements of jurisdiction: (i) prima facie jurisdiction
ratione personae; (ii) prima facie jurisdiction ratione materiae; (iii) prima facie jurisdiction
ratione temporis, and (iv) prima facie jurisdiction ratione voluntatis. The same approach

was utilized by the arbitral tribunal in CAurchill Mining and others v. Indonesia.”

757 Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler and Aurélia Antonietti, Arbitration under International Investment Agreements: An Analysis
of the Key Procedural, Jurisdictional and Substantive Issues (QUP 2010) 530; see also the analysis of Teinver S.A., Trans-
portes de Cercantas S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur §.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSTD Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision
on Provisional Measures (8 April 2016).

758 Perenco (n 734).

759 ibid. para. 39-41, pp. 16-17.

760 See RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia, CSTD Case No. ARB/12/10, Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for
Provisional Measures (12 December 2013).

761 See Burlington Resources, Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5 Procedural Order No. 1 on
Burlington Oriente’s Request for Provisional Measures (29 June 2009).

762 Quiborax $.A., Non Metallic Minerals §.A. and Allan Fosk Kaphin. v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, \CSID Case No.
ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010).

763 Churchill Mining PLC v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSTD Case No. ARB/12/14, Procedural Order No. 3 (4 March 2013).

440

ARTICLE 47

In Rizzani and others v. Kuwait,’ the arbitral tribunal established its power to order
PMs by referring to the parties’ acceptance of this power and the fact that both parties

submitted PMs requests.”

Whilst the general rule is that the party requesting PMs is under the obligation to
establish the tribunal’s jurisdiction to grant its request, there exist certain exceptional
circumstances that warrant a more lenient approach, as is the case when the PM is
‘security for costs’ requested by a State party. This happened in the case of RSM v. Saint
Lucia, where the arbitral tribunal noted that ‘a tribunal which evidently does not have
jurisdiction lacks the power to render any decision at all. On the other hand, a respond-
ent may well have a legitimate interest in obtaining security for costs even in cases

where the tribunal does not have subject matter jurisdiction.”
B. The power to order PMs

As mentioned above, the default position under Article 47 is that a party may request
PMs and that ICSID tribunals may also recommend PMs at their own initiative. How-
ever, the parties may agree otherwise by either (i) excluding the possibility for the tribu-
nal to grant PMs; or (ii) limiting the tribunal’s power to grant PMs.

Concerning the nature of arbitral tribunals’ power to order PMs,’

the proliferating
view is that ICSID tribunals have an inherent power to consider and order PMs. This
is supported by a number of ICSID tribunals which held that they are ‘endowed with
the inherent powers required to preserve the integrity of its own process — even if the
remedies open to it are necessarily different from those that might be available to a

domestic court of law in an ICSID Member State’.”

However, the ICSID Rules and Convention clearly provide for an express power to

grant PMs. Thus, arbitral tribunals’ powers to consider and grant PMs, though inherent

764 Rizzani de Eccher §.p.A., Obrascén Huarte Lain S.A. and Trevi S.p.A. v. State of Kuwait, (CSTD Case No. ARB/17/8,
Decision on Provisional Measures (23 November 2017).

765 ‘The arbitral tribunal stated that ‘Neither the Claimants nor the Respondent has challenged the Tribunal’s power to
grant provisional measures under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. As set out above, both Parties have filed their
respective requests for provisional measures. Both Parties also participated at the Hearing and sought orders for pro-
visional measures from this Tribunal. In addition, both the Claimants’ and the Respondent’s Counsel accepted, at the
Hearing on 3 November 2017, that the Tribunal has the authority to decide on their respective provisional measures
requests. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that it has the power under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention to rule on
the Claimants’ and the Respondent’s Applications’. Rizzani (n 764) para. 98, p. 45.

766 RSM (n 760) para. 59, pp. 13-14.

767 See Report for the Biennial Conference in Washington D.C., International Law Association, April 2014, pp. 8-9.

768 See Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Decision on Preliminary Issues
(23 June 2008).

441

4.508

4.509

4.510

4.511

4.512


4.513

4.514

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

in the rules, are not inherent as part of the tribunals’ general role or functions because:
(i) an express authorized power was needed under the rules and the Convention; and

769 which shows

(ii) an opt-out mechanism is available under the rules regarding PMs,
that such the power to order PMs is not inseparable from the general role and functions

of the decision-making process.
C. The power of annulment committees regarding PMs

From time to time, ICSID annulment committees face situations where one of the
parties requested PMs under Article 47 and Rule 39. However, almost all the publicly
accessible provisional measures requested during the annulment proceedings under Ar-
ticle 47 were either dismissed or rejected.” Committees typically refrain from deciding
whether or not they have the power to grant PMs requests under Article 47 by stating
that the request has not satisfied the necessary requisites.

In Border Timbers and others v. Zimbabwe,’ the Committee noted the apparent con-
tradiction between Article 52(4 and 5)’ of the ICSID Convention and Rule 53 of
the ICSID Rules.””? While Article 52 seemed to exclude the application of Article 47
in the annulment proceedings, Rule 53 seemed to apply a number of rules on the an-
nulment proceedings, amongst which is Rule 39 pertaining to provisional measures.
However, the Committee did not try to reach a conclusion on this issue as it was of the
opinion that the request did not satisfy the requirements for granting PMs anyway. This
same conclusion was reached by the same Committee when faced with PM requests

769 See Loretta Malintoppi, ‘Provisional Measures in Recent ICSID Proceedings: What Parties Request and What Tri-
bunals Order’ in C. Binder and others (eds), International Investment Law for the 21st Century: Essays in Honour of
Christoph Schreuer (OUP 2009) 181.

770 Provisional measures were requested under Article 47 in the cases of Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of
Turkey- Annulment proceedings, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Decision on Applicant Request for Provisional Measures
(7 May 2012); and Border Timbers Limited, Timber Products International (Private) Limited, and Hangani Development
Co. (Private) Limited v. Republic of Zimbabwe, CSTD Case No. ARB/10/25, Decision on the Applicant’s Application
for Provisional Measures (17 March 2016). Provisional measures not requested under Article 47 occurred in the cases
of Ioan Micula, Viorel Micula and others v. Romania- annulment proceedings, ICSTD Case No. ARB/05/20 Decision on
Provisional Measures (18 August 2014) and Border Timbers Limited, Timber Products International (Private) Limited,
and Hangani Development Co. (Private) Limited v. Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25, Decision on the
Applicant’s Urgent Application for Provisional Measures Regarding the Temporary Stay of Execution and the Escrow
Arrangement (22 August 2017).

771 Border Timbers n 770).

772 Article 52(4) and (5) read as ‘(4) The provisions of Articles 41-45, 48, 49, 53 and 54, and of Chapters VI and VII shall
apply mutatis mutandis to proceedings before the Committee.

(5) The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so require, stay enforcement of the award pending its
decision. If the applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement shall be stayed
provisionally until the Committee rules on such request.’

773 Rule 53 reads as “The provisions of these Rules shall apply mutatis mutandis to any procedure relating to the interpreta-

tion, revision or annulment of an award and to the decision of the Tribunal or Committee’.

442

ARTICLE 47

under Articles 50(2) and 52(5) once and Articles 50(2) and 52(5) and Rules 39 and 54

in another application.””
D. The binding nature of PMs

Since Maffezini v. Spain,’ ICSID tribunals have developed a doctrine giving PMs a
binding effect on the parties. The drafting history of Article 47 shows that the power of
an ICSID tribunal is to ‘prescribe’, rather than to merely ‘recommend’ PMs. However,
following certain States’ objections to the binding nature of PMs, especially against a
State party, the word ‘prescribe’ was eventually replaced by the word ‘recommend’. ’”%
This suggests that there was a deliberate intention not to grant arbitral tribunal the

power to order binding PMs.

However, in all cases and regardless of the binding nature of PMs, there is a general
duty on the parties not to aggravate the dispute or frustrate its outcome. Furthermore,
the tribunal may take into consideration the parties’ conduct (i.e. voluntary compliance)
and draw negative inferences when rendering a final and binding award.’” In any event,
arbitral tribunals seem to have developed an inclination to impose a binding nature on

PMs, with some notable exceptions.

Having reviewed numerous cases and orders regarding PMs, it is evident that arbitral
tribunals adopt different approaches to the use of the terms ‘recommendations’ vs. ‘or-
ders’. Sometimes, tribunals avoid express statements that they merely have a power to
‘recommend’ PMs and other times they adopt vague wording or wording that implies

a binding nature.

In Saipem v. Bangladesh,” the arbitral tribunal did not explicitly address the nature of
its power to ‘recommend’ or ‘order’ PMs. The tribunal consistently used the word ‘rec-
ommend’ in the decision named “Decision on jurisdiction and recommendation on pro-
visional measures’. The title of the decision itself reflects that the arbitral tribunal is of

the opinion that a recommendation on provisional measures is different in nature from

774 See Border Timbers Limited, Timber Products International (Private) Limited, and Hangani Development Co. (Private)
Limited v. Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSTD Case No. ARB/10/25, Decision on the Applicant’s Application for Provisional
Measures to Exclude Consideration of the Merits in Part I (13 October 2016) and Decision on the Applicant’s Urgent
Application for Provisional Measures Regarding the Temporary Stay of Execution and the Escrow Arrangement (22
August 2017).

775 See Emilio Agustin Maffezini (n 756).

776 Schreuer and others (n 3) 764.

777 See Section 7 below.

778 Saipem S.p.A. v. People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/7, Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommen-
dation on Provisional Measures (21 March 2007).

443

4.515

4.516

4.517

4.518


4.519

4.520

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

a ‘decision’.’” In its conclusion, the tribunal decided the following ‘the Tribunal hereby
recommends that Bangladesh take the steps necessary to ensure that Petrobangla re-
frain from encashing the Warranty Bond No. PG/USD/12/92 issued by Banque Indo-
suez’. The same approach was followed in Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania,” where the ar-
bitral tribunal ‘recommended’ provisional measures, but ‘ordered’ other measures under

Article 43.

In other cases, ICSID tribunals have opted to give PMs a binding effect on the par-
ties, in disregard to the travaux préparatoires and history of drafting Article 47. The
first arbitral tribunal to discuss the issue and reach a conclusion of the biding nature
of PMs under Article 47 was Maffezini v. Spain where the arbitral tribunal concluded
that the authority of an ICSID tribunal to rule on PMs was ‘no less binding than at of
a final award. Accordingly, for the purposes of this Order, the Tribunal deems the word
“recommend” to be of equivalent value as the word “order”.’*' Recently, Some tribunals
went further in their emphasis on the nature of PMs to note that decisions on PMs are
‘orders’ not ‘recommendations’.”*? In Occidental v. Ecuador, the arbitral tribunal held that
“The Tribunal wishes to make clear for the avoidance of doubt that, although Article 47
of the ICSID Convention uses the word “recommend”, the Tribunal is, in fact, empow-

ered to order provisional measures’.”*

In City Oriente v. Ecuador and Petroecuador, the arbitral tribunal affirmed the binding
nature of PMs, regardless of the ‘semantic discussion’. The tribunal held that ‘a teleolog-
ical interpretation of both provisions leads to the conclusion that the provisional meas-
ures recommended are necessarily binding. The Tribunal may only order such measures
if their adoption is necessary to preserve the rights of the parties and guarantee that the
award will fulfill its purpose of providing effective judicial protection. Such goals may
only be reached if the measures are binding, and they share the exact same binding na-
ture as the final arbitral award’. The arbitral tribunal also asserted that ‘[I]n any event,

whatever the meaning ascribed to such words, a failure to comply with orders given

779 In making its recommendation, it stated that ‘the Tribunal hereby recommends that Bangladesh take the steps neces-
sary to ensure that Petrobangla refrain from encashing the Warranty Bond No. PG/USD/12/92 issued by Banque
Indosuez’.

780 Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Procedural Order No.
1 (31 March 2006).

781 Maffezini (n 756). The binding nature of PMs expressed in Maffezini was subsequently confirmed in Victor Pey Casado
(n 740); Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, CSTD Case No. ARB/02/18; Occidental Petroleum (n 745); City Oriente Limited v.
Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), ICSTD Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on
Provisional Measures (19 November 2007); Nowa Group Investments, B.V. v. Romania, ICSTID Case No. ARB/16/19,
Procedural Order No. 7 (17 March 2017).

782 Burlington Resources (n 761).

783 Occidental Petroleum (n 781) para. 58, p. 27.

784 City Oriente (n 781) para. 52.

444

ARTICLE 47

to Respondents by the Tribunal in accordance with Article 47 of the Convention will

entail a violation of Article 26 thereof, and engage Respondents liability’.”

The proposed amendments to the ICSID Rules”*® use the same word ‘recommend’ to
refer to the tribunal’s power to grant provisional measures. In as much as it would have
been clearer and better to use the word ‘order’, it is doubtful that the reiteration of
‘recommend’ will cause any issue, since consistent case law and practice on the sub-
ject evidenced that ‘recommend’ and ‘order’ are treated as interchangeable terms, irre-
spective of any linguistic or terminological distinction. However, clear guidance on the
consequences of non-compliance with PM orders/recommendations remains unregu-
lated under the newly proposed amendments to the ICSID Rules. Whilst the newly
proposed amendments are indeed welcomed and revolutionary, this could have been
perfected by including express regulation on all aspects of PMs (to streamline practices
and decisions on PMs). However, the author does recognize the laborious and daunting
task this would have entailed, since amendments to ICSID Rules would generally in-
volve colossal efforts on all levels. Thus, the author does commend the priority amend-
ments proposed to the ICSID Rules and considers this a positive step towards securing
ICSID’s leading role in administering investment disputes related proceedings.

4. PROVISIONAL MEASURES AND PROTECTED RIGHTS

The pre-requisites for granting PMs are not expressly mentioned in the ICSID Con-
vention or Rules and so they are based on an empirical review of ICSID case law. That
said, it is submitted that the conditions for PMs are divided into ‘jurisdictional’ and
‘substantive’ conditions.’”*” A request for PMs must first establish a prima facie juris-
diction, then it must specify (i) the rights to be preserved; (ii) the measures for which
a recommendation is required; and (iii) the circumstances/conditions rendering these
measures necessary.’** However, ICSID tribunals have not adopted a uniform test when
dealing with requests for PMs, and the approach of each tribunal largely depends on
the facts and circumstances of each case. Owing to the absence of a uniform system
of precedents, arbitral tribunals applied different tests and criteria, which led to dif-

ferent interpretations. Nevertheless, ICJ case law on PMs remained of relevance and

785 ibid. para. 53.

786 ‘Proposals for Amendment of the ICSID Rules — Consolidated Draft Rules’ (n 729).

787 See Lenci (n 730) 203.

788 International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ‘Provisional Measures — ICSID Convention Arbitration
<https://icsid-worldbank.org/en/Pages/process/Provisional-Measures.aspx> (accessed 14 July 2018); and as the claim-
ant argues in Teinver (n 757) para. 103.

445

4.521

4.522


4.523

4.524

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

importance.’ For example, in Menzies and Aviation v. Senegal,” the arbitral tribunal
stated that the ‘the conditions necessary to obtain the grant of provisional measures are
the following cumulative conditions: (i) The prima facie jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tri-
bunal; (ii) the prima facie existence of a right to be protected; (iii) the necessity of the
requested measures; (iv) the urgency of the requested measures; (v) The provisional na-

ture of the measures, i.e. the measures do not prejudge the substance of the dispute.’””?

In Churchill Mining and others, v. Indonesia,’” the arbitral tribunal noted that ‘Accord-
ing to Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the request must specify “the rights to
be preserved, the measures the recommendation of which is requested, and the circum-
stances that require such measures”. Various ICSID tribunals have interpreted these
requirements to mean that provisional measures must (i) serve to protect certain rights
of the applicant, (ii) meet the requirement of urgency; and (iii) the requirement of
necessity, which implies the existence of a risk of irreparable or substantial harm’. Simi-

larly, in Rizzani and others v. Kuwait,”

where the respondent argued that provisional
measures may only be granted if the claimants prove: (a) an urgent risk of imminent
and irreparable harm; (b) a prima facie case on jurisdiction; (c) a prima facie case on the
merits; (d) that the urgent, irreparable harm to the claimants ‘greatly’ outweighs the
harm that would be caused to the respondent if the interim measures were granted; and
(e) that the request does not entail prejudging the merits of the claims. However, the
arbitral tribunal afhirmed that the requirements for granting PMs are only ‘urgency’ and

‘necessity’.’"4

In any event, it is worth noting that neither the Convention nor the ICSID rules list
the conditions for PMs and so I provide an analysis of these requisite conditions herein

below after scrutinizing the protected rights and categories of PMs.”

The proposed
amendments to the ICSID rules explicitly mention ‘urgency’ and ‘necessity’ as condi-
tions for granting PMs. The proposed amendments state that ‘In deciding whether to

recommend provisional measures, the Tribunal shall consider all relevant circumstances.

789 City Oriente (n 781) citing the cases of Electricity Company of Sofia — Belgium v. Bulgaria, judgment, PCI] (Ser. A/B,
No. 79, 4 April 1939); LaGrand - Germany v. U.S.A. LaGrand, judgment, ICJ (27 June 2001). See also Perenco (n 734),
citing Electricity Company of Sofia — Belgium v. Bulgaria, judgment, PCI] (Ser. A/B, No. 79, 4 April 1939); LaGrand -
Germany v. U.S.A. LaGrand, judgment, ICJ (27 June 2001); see Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. United Kingdom v. Iran, Interim
Protection Order, ICJ Reports 1951 (July 5, 1951); Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (Democratic Republic of
the Congo v. Uganda), judgment, ICJ (19 December 2005).

790 See Menzies Middle East and Africa $.A. and Aviation Handling Services International Ltd. v. Republic of Senegal, CSTD
Case No. ARB/15/21, Procedural Order. No. 2 (2 December 2015).

791 ibid. para. 108, p. 28.

792 Churchill Mining (n 763) para. 42, p. 13.

793 Rizzani(n 764).

794 ibid. para. 100, p. 46.

795 See Section 6.

446

ARTICLE 47

The Tribunal shall only recommend provisional measures if it determines that they are

urgent and necessary’.

Whilst not mentioning ‘harm’ as an express condition, the proposed amendments refer
to ‘imminent or current harm’as an illustrative ground on the basis of which an arbitral

tribunal can consider granting a PM.”
A. Protection of rights by virtue of PMs - an overview of issues

On the specific issue of what rights merit protection by virtue of PMs, several sub-
issues require careful scrutiny, including: who requires protection, what rights merit

protection, etc.

At the outset, the ICSID Convention and Rules afford both investors and host States
the right to request PMs. Under the ICSID Convention, PMs are meant to protect ‘the
parties’ rights, and they must be rights ‘in dispute”’’ between the parties. They could
also be procedural or substantive””* in nature. However, PMs should not prejudge or
prejudice the merits.

In Churchill Mining v. Indonesia,” the arbitral tribunal rejected the respondent’s re-
quest to order the claimant to ‘refrain from making false, unfounded and misleading
statements in the media regarding the case in hand’ and ‘not to contact any governmen-
tal officials to suggest settlement outside the present arbitration.“

In Amco v. Indonesia, the arbitral tribunal faced a similar situation where the respondent
claimed that the claimant’s statements ‘could potentially have a negative impact on the
economy’.*"' The Amco tribunal rejected the PMs request on the basis that such state-

ments/media campaigns ‘would not be an influence on rights in dispute’.°”

As is the case with the conditions of PMs, Article 47 does not specify or list the rights

to be protected, and so reliance is to be made on the ICSID tribunals’ decisions aimed

796 Rule 50 of the newly proposed amendments to the ICSID rules states, in pertinent part: ‘(1) A party may at any time
request that the Tribunal recommend provisional measures to preserve that party’s rights, including measures to: (a)
ptevent action that is likely to cause: (i) current or imminent harm to the other party; or (ii) prejudice to the arbitral
ptocess [...]’ See ‘Proposals for Amendment of the ICSID Rules — Consolidated Draft Rules’ (n 729).

797 Churchill Mining (n 763) and Amco Asia Corp €& others v. The Republic of Indonesia (ICSTD Case ARB/81/1, Decision on
Request for Provisional Measures dated 9 December 19831) as cited in Churchill Mining (n 763) para. 49, p. 15.

798 See Section 4.B.

799 Churchill Mining (n 763).

800 ibid. para. 3, p.1 and para. 59, p. 17.

801 Ameo Asia (n 797) as cited in Churchill Mining (n 763) para. 49, p. 15.

802. ibid.

447

4.525

4.526

4.527

4.528

4.529

4.530


4.531

4.532

4.533

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

at disambiguating the rights to be protected. In Plama v. Bulgaria, the arbitral tribunal
noted that “The rights to be preserved must relate to the requesting party’s ability to
have its claims and requests for relief in the arbitration fairly considered and decided
[...] Thus the rights to be preserved by provisional measures are circumscribed by the re-
questing party's claims and requests for relief. They may be general rights, such as the rights
to due process ..., but those general rights must be related to the specific disputes in arbi-

tration, which, in turn, are defined by the Claimant's claims and requests for relief to date.”

Accordingly, for the purpose of granting PMs, the requesting party must prove that
the PMs requested pertain to a right ‘in dispute’. However, should such rights exist? Can
they be contingent or conditional? These are questions that have triggered a heated debate
amongst tribunals and scholars.*™ The ‘traditional view’ is that PMs may only be grant-
ed in relation to an existing right which is threatened or the preservation of a right that
is under the risk of being lost or irreparably harmed.*” Nevertheless, this traditional

view does not necessarily capture a uniform practice all throughout ICSID cases.

In Maffezini v. Spain,** the arbitral tribunal highlighted the wording of Rule 39(1)
granting the claimant the right to request ‘provisional measures for the preservation of
its rights’. The tribunal analysed the wording of Rule 39 and noted that “The use of the
present tense implies that such rights must exist at the time of the request, must not be
hypothetical, nor are ones to be created in the future’ . The arbitral tribunal went further and
provided examples for ‘existing rights’ as ‘an interest in a piece of property, the owner-
ship of which is in dispute’.*°”

On the specific standard of an ‘existing’ right, arbitral tribunals have usually accepted
that a right, worthy of protection, may exist on a ‘prima facie’ basis. For the example, in
Burlington Resources v. Ecuador, the tribunal noted ‘the Parties’ concurrent view that the
Tribunal must examine the existence of rights under a prima facie standard ... It cannot

require actual proof, but must be satisfied that the rights exist prima facie’.*°°

803 See Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Order (6 September 2005) para.
AO, p. 13.

804 See RSM (n 760); Occidental Petroleum (n 745); City Oriente (n 781), Burlington Resources (n 761); and Maffezini (n
756).

805 See Malintoppi (n 769) 157.

806 See Maffezini (n 756).

807 ibid. para. 14, p. 3.

808 See Burlington Resources (n 761) para. 53, p. 18. Same views were expressed by the arbitral tribunal in Occidental Pe-
troleum (n 745) para. 64, p. 29, that “The right to be preserved only has to be asserted as a theoretically existing right, as
opposed to proven to exist in fact. The Tribunal, at the provisional measures stage, will only deal with the nature of the
right claimed, not with its existence or the merits of the allegations of its violation In City Oriente v. Ecuador and Petroecua-
dor, the arbitral tribunal stated that ‘the party requesting the measure need only prove that its claim has the appearance
of, good right, fumus oni iuris, or, in other words, the petitioner must prove that the rights invoked are plausible’. City Oriente

448

ARTICLE 47

Accordingly, the ‘traditional view’ regarding the existence of the right was not uni-
formly applied or globally upheld. Some arbitral tribunals did not require the existence
of the right to be protected as a condition to granting PMs. In RSM w. Saint Lucia,”
the arbitral tribunal granted the respondent State its security for costs request to protect
a conditional/contingent right to ‘costs’ in light of the ‘material risk that Claimant will
be unable or unwilling to comply with a costs award issued against it’.*"° The tribunal
was divided as to whether a protected right must exist or whether it suffices to have a
conditional/hypothetical/contingent right. By a majority of views, the arbitral tribunal
held that a right protected by PMs need not be an existing right, but could be a ‘future
conditional right’. The majority asserted that ‘the Aypotherical element of the right at is-

sue is one of the inherent characteristics of the regime of provisional measures’.*"

From a purely abstract stance, it is submitted that certain circumstances may warrant
due consideration of a conditional/hypothetical/contingent right for the purpose of
PMs. Moreover, arbitral tribunals should carefully consider that the terms ‘conditional’,
‘contingent’ and ‘theoretical’ are not synonymous, but may all qualify for protection by
virtue of PMs depending on the circumstances of each case, the purpose of the PM and
the significant harm that may ensue if the PM is not granted. Thus, arbitral tribunals
should be flexible in adopting the ‘traditional view’ or the more ‘lenient approach’ de-

pending on the prevailing circumstances.
B. The categories of rights to be protected by virtue of PMs

As mentioned herein above, there is no exhaustive list of: (i) ‘rights’ that merit protec-
tion by way of PMs; and (ii) ‘types of PMs’ that may be sought and granted under
the ICSID Convention and the Rules. Consequently, ICSID tribunals have enjoyed
considerable discretion in ascertaining and determining the categories of rights to be
protected and the types of PMs that can be granted, depending on the factual and legal

context of the dispute.*”

The ICSID jurisprudence is still developing in this respect and Article 47 affords
the parties and tribunals the needed discretion to request PMs as deemed suitable

to achieve the protection of the parties’ respective rights and interests. The arbitral

Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/21,
Decision on Revocation of Provisional Measures and Other Procedural Matters (13 May 2008).

809 See RSM (n 760).

810 ibid. para. 29, p. 6.

811 ibid. para. 72, p. 17.

812 As stated by the arbitral tribunal in Maffezini ‘lack of precedents in granting a certain PM requested, does not neces-
sarily lead to the rejection of this request’. See Maffezini (n 756) para. 5, p. 2. Same principle cited and affirmed later by
Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Procedural order No. 3 (18 January 2005) para. 11, p. 6.

449

4.534

4.535

4.536

4.537


4.538

4.539

4.540

4.541

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

tribunal in Maffezini v. Spain affirmed that ‘the lack of precedent is not necessarily
determinative of our competence to order provisional measures in a case where such
measures fall within the purview of the Arbitration Rules and are required under the

circumstances’ .°%

By way of illustration, security for costs as a PM, which is now frequently requested
from ICSID tribunals, was granted for the first time in RSM v. Saint Lucia,** which
evidences the fact that ICSID tribunals can indeed consider granting new PMs that
have not be granted before insofar as the circumstances of the case so warrant and the

conditions for granting the PM are fulfilled.

On the specific issue of the types of rights that could be protected by the means of PMs,
ICSID practice has shown that such types vary considerably, but, on a ‘macro level’, can
broadly fall into two main categories on the basis of the procedural and substantive
nature of the rights:°?

(a) substantive rights which pertain to the merits of the case, and this includes: pecuni-
ary and non-pecuniary rights of the parties, such as: a sum of money, a plot of land,
shares of a company, etc.; and

(b) procedural rights which are intended to safeguard the procedural integrity of the
proceedings, and this includes: giving access to evidence (through measures like the
preservation and production of evidence), avoiding parallel domestic proceedings
and maintaining the confidentiality of the proceedings.

On a ‘micro level’, substantive and procedural rights can be further sub-categorized into

several categories, which shall be addressed below.

(a) The right of the preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation of the
dispute

The right to the preservation of the status guo and the non-aggravation of the dis-
pute are amongst the most frequently invoked rights in PM application. Many ICSID

813 See Maffezini (n 756) para. 5, p. 2.

814 RSM (n 760).

815 In Quiborax (n 762) para. 117, p. 33 the arbitral tribunal stated: ‘the rights to be preserved by provisional measures are
not limited to those which form the subject matter of the dispute, but may extend to procedural rights, including the
general right to the preservation of the status quo and to the non-aggravation of the dispute [...] these latter rights are
self-standing rights’. Similarly, in Biwazer Gauff (n 780), the arbitral tribunal stated: “The ambit of this power is very
broad. The type of rights capable of protection by means of provisional measures are not only substantive rights but also
procedural rights.’ This was also affirmed by the arbitral tribunals in Burlington Resources (n 761), Plama (n 803).

450

ARTICLE 47

tribunals found that the preservation of the status quo and the non-aggravation are self-

standing rights.*°

The existence of these rights has also been established in the ICJ jurisprudence first,
then in the ICSID jurisprudence ever since the first ICSID case Holiday Inn v. Moroc-
co.8"” It was then afiirmed in Amco v. Indonesia where the arbitral tribunal acknowledged
that ‘the good and fair practical rule, according to which both Parties to a legal dispute
should refrain, in their own interest, to do anything that could aggravate or exacer-
bate the same, thus rendering its solution possibly more difficult’.*!* The same view was
adopted by the arbitral tribunals in Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine’ and Perenco v. Ecuador.®*

In Quiborax and Non-Metallic v. Bolivia,*' the arbitral tribunal noted that the travaux
préparatoires of the ICSID Convention referred to the need ‘to preserve the status quo
between the parties pending [the] final decision on the merits’.°” The tribunal referred
to the commentary to the 1968 edition of the ICSID Arbitration Rules which ex-
plained that Article 47 of the Convention ‘is based on the principle that once a dispute
is submitted to arbitration the parties should not take steps that might aggravate or
extend their dispute or prejudice the execution of the award’.**

In Palma v. Bulgaria the arbitral tribunal noted that ‘the right to non-aggravation of the
dispute refers to actions which would make resolution of the dispute by the Tribunal
more difficult. It is a right to maintenance of the status quo, when a change of circum-
stances threatens the ability of the Arbitral Tribunal to grant the relief which a party
seeks and the capability of giving effect to the relief’.*”*

In considering the importance of maintaining the status quo, as a basis for granting
PMs, one question arises, that is: at what time should the status quo be considered? The
ICSID Convention offered no answer, though the matter was considered (but not de-

cided) during the drafting process.*”

816 Teinver (n 757); Quiborax (n 762).

817 In ICSID jurisprudence, this principle Holiday Inns S.A. and others v. Morocco, ICSTD Case No. ARB/72/1, Decision of
the Tribunal (2 July 1972) was first affirmed in and then reiterated in Ameco Asia (n 797). The principle was re-afiirmed
(albeit with a more limited approach) in Plama (n 803), Occidental Petroleum (n 745); City Oriente (n 781), as cited and
adopted in Burlington Resources (n 761).

818 Ameo Asia (n 797) as cited in Burlington Resources (n 761).

819 Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No. 1 (1 July 2003).

820 Perenco (n 734).

821 Quiborax (n 762).

822. ibid. para. 134, p. 38.

823 ibid. The same wording was adopted by the arbitral tribunal in Burlington Resources (n 761) para. 62, p. 20.

824 Plama(n 803) para. 45, p. 15.

825 Schreuer and others (n 3) 778, where the authors state that ‘the question was raised whether the status quo existing dur-

ing the normal execution of the contract or at the time when the controversy arose would be decisive [...] the purpose of

451

4.542

4.543

4.544

4.545


4.546

4.547

4.548

4.549

4.550

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

Whilst some argue that the satus quo is the status existing at the commencement of the
arbitration proceedings and marked by the registration of the request for arbitration,
others have offered different views on timing. For example, in City Oriente v. Ecuador
and Petroecuador, the arbitral tribunal accepted the claimant’s request to maintain the
status quo prior to the enactment of Law No. 2006—42 enacted in April 2006,* which
was almost eight months before commencement of the arbitration proceedings in De-
cember 2006.7

In Teinver and others v. Argentina, the claimants requested the issuance of ‘an emer-
gency, temporary order to preserve she status quo (i.e., the situation that exists at this date)
with respect to all the financial statements, until such time as it rules on this Request for
provisional measures’.*”* In Nova Group v. Romania the arbitral tribunal was of the view
that ‘the right to preservation of the status quo necessarily “focuses on the situation at
the time of the measures”, rather than looking either to the past (the investor’s situation

as of a prior date) or to the future (the investor’s goal with respect to a future award)’.*”?

In Quiborax and Non-Metallic v. Bolivia, the arbitral tribunal acknowledged that the
domestic criminal proceedings ‘exacerbate the climate of hostility’ between the parties,
however, it noted that there is no current investment of the claimant in the respondent
State and that the claimant, implicated in the criminal proceedings, does not live in the

respondent State and has not been formally accused.*”

In light of the above, it is clear that arbitral tribunals are prepared to consider differ-
ent dates from which the status quo could be assessed depending on the type of PMs

requested and the factual circumstances.

(b) The procedural integrity of ICSID proceedings
Maintaining or safeguarding the procedural integrity of ICSID proceedings has been
frequently invoked as basis for PMs applications. Most commonly, related PM requests

include: the stay parallel domestic proceedings and/or protections orders to safeguard

the provisional measures must be as far as possible to preserve the status quo at the time when the provisional measures
were requested’,

826 In City Oriente (n 781) the law in question required oil companies to pay at least 50% share of ‘extraordinary income’,
and, in October 2007, Ecuador issued another decree increasing the government take from 50% to 99%. See Elisa-
beth Eljuri and Clovis Trevino, ‘Energy Investment Disputes in Latin America: The Pursuit of Stability’ (2015) 33(2)
Berkeley Journal of International Law <https://scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=https://www.
google.com.e.g./&httpsredir=1 &article=1506&context=bjil> (accessed 27 August 2018).

827 City Oriente (n 781).

828 Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercantas §.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. Argentine Republic, CSTD Case No.
ARB/09/1, Award (21 July 2017) para. 49, p. 10.

829 Nova Group (n 781) para. 264, p. 89.

830 Quiborax (n 762) para. 84, p. 26.

452

ARTICLE 47

the investor’s company or the investors’ personnel and afhliates from any retaliatory
proceedings or other State acts or omissions that threaten the investor, its personnel,

family members and/or afhiliates.

In Quiborax and Non-Metallic v. Bolivia,**' the investor requested the stay of the parallel
criminal proceedings and the arbitral tribunal granted the request as it recognized the
undue pressure exercised against the investor and its potential witnesses and the threat
this constitutes to the procedural integrity of the ICSID proceedings.*” ‘The arbitral
tribunal asserted that if measures are intended to protect the procedural integrity of the

arbitration they are urgent by definition." However, if the applicant’s right ‘in dispute’

in the arbitration will not be affected by the outcome of the domestic proceedings, then

no urgency.*#

In Nova v. Romania,** the Tribunal noted that ‘the right of procedural integrity inher-
ently includes two different components. First, it includes the right of the parties to
present their respective positions to the tribunal, which includes the absence of undue
interference with their access to witnesses and evidence, and their ability to instruct and
assist counsel to marshall these on their behalf. Second, the right to procedural integrity

includes the ability of a tribunal to fashion meaningful relief at the end of the case [..
| 6

Similarly, other ICSID tribunals have considered measures that pertain to parallel
domestic proceedings that may or may not threaten the integrity of the ICSID pro-
ceedings. For example, in Quiborax and Non-Metallic v. Bolivia,**’ Ioan Micula and oth-
ers v. Romania,*® Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine?’ and SGS v. Pakistan*™ arbitral tribunals
have granted the requested PMs by ordering the stay of parallel domestic proceedings.
Conversely, in Saipem v. Bangladesh, Plama v. Bulgaria,*” Nova Group v. Romania®®
and Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine*™ arbitral tribunals have denied the requested PMs on

the basis of respecting the sovereignty of States to ‘pursue criminal proceedings within

831. ibid.

832. ibid. para. 148, p. 41.

833. ibid. para. 151, p. 42.

834 Plama (n 803) para. 46, p. 15.

835 Nova Group (n 781).

836 ibid. para. 235, pp. 74-75.

837 Quiborax (n 762).

838 loan Micula, Viorel Micula and others v. Romania, 1CSTD Case No. ARB/05/20, Award (11 December 2013).
839 Tokios Tokelés (n 819).

840 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance §.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (SGS v. Pakistan), ICSTD Case No. ARB/01/13.
841 Saipem (n 778).

842 Plama(n 803).

843 Nova Group (n 781).

844 Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No. 3 (18 January 2005).

ary

453

4.551

4.552

4.553


4.554

4.555

4.556

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

its borders’®** or the failure of the applicant to demonstrate how the conditions are
satisfied.*”

(c) The right of exclusive jurisdiction under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention:

The right to exclusivity of ICSID proceedings stipulated under Article 26 of the IC-
SID Convention has also been subject to protection by way of provisional measures.°””
This right is mostly invoked in relation to the stay of parallel domestic proceedings and
protection orders in relation to domestic proceedings and measures targeting certain
investor's personnel or affiliates.

In Perenco v. Ecuador,** the claimant requested the non-enforcement of a law that im-
poses additional pecuniary obligations, which are not stipulated in the contract and also
requested the stay of parallel domestic proceedings aimed at the application of that law.
The respondent argued that the claimant can make the required monetary deposit and
then challenge the enforcement notices before the Ecuadorian courts. However, the
arbitral tribunal rejected such argument, asserting that the resort to the Ecuadorian
courts by the respondent or the claimant is inconsistent with Article 26 of the ICSID
Convention, and that none of the parties may resort to Ecuadorian domestic courts to
enforce or resist any claim or right which forms part of the subject matter of the ICSID

arbitration.2”

In light of the existing case law, determining what actions or proceedings constitute a
violation of Article 26 of the ICSID Convention remains to be established with cer-
tainty. For example, in Churchill Mining v. Indonesia,*® the arbitral tribunal rejected the
respondent’s request to order the claimant ‘not to contact any governmental officials to
suggest settlement outside the present arbitration’, and it asserted that ‘parties to arbi-
tration proceedings are free to engage in settlement negotiations. Article 26 of the ICSID
Convention [.. .] applies to parallel judicial or arbitral proceedings, not to negotiations .*' In
Quiborax and Non-Metallic v. Bolivia,®* the claimant requested the stay of the criminal
proceedings based on the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings, but the arbitral tribu-
nal adopted a ‘conservative view’ as to what threatens the right to exclusivity. The said
tribunal stated that whilst criminal proceedings relate to the ICSID arbitration, such

proceedings do not threaten the exclusivity of the arbitration proceedings under Article

845 Nova Group (n 781) para. 328, p. 119.

846 Tokios Tokelés (n 844) para. 12, p. 6.

847 Teinver (n 757); Quiborax (n 762); Tokios Tokelés (n 819 and n 844).
848 Perenco (n 734).

849 ibid. para. 61 p. 30.

850 Churchill Mining (n 763).

851. ibid. para. 53, p. 16.

852 Quiborax (n 762).

454

ARTICLE 47

26 of the ICSID Convention. The arbitral tribunal held that the ‘exclusivity of the
ICSID proceedings applies only to investment disputes, i.e. here to the determination
of whether Respondent has breached its international obligations under the BIT and
whether Claimants are entitled to the relief they seek’.**

In light of the prevailing practice before ICSID tribunals, whilst arbitral tribunals fre-
quently deny the stay of criminal proceedings (either under the category of stay of par-
allel proceedings or the category of protection orders) on the basis of exclusivity,** they
tend to grant the stay of criminal proceedings when requested to protect the claimant’s
personnel and affiliates against threated penalization*®*

in the ICSID arbitration. °°

or impairment to play their role

(d) The right to immunity

By virtue of Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention,*” certain categories of per-
sons enjoy immunity against all actions in relation to the ICSID proceedings. ‘This
includes all the members of the ICSID Administrative Council, arbitrators, the parties
to the arbitration, their agents, counsel, advocates, witnesses and/or experts. In some
cases, this immunity was invoked as a right to be protected by means of PMs. In Sem-

*8 the Argentinian Federal Court issued an injunction preventing the

pra v. Argentina,
witnesses from appearing before the ICSID arbitral tribunal, stating, inzer alia, that the
claimant’s witness in the ICSID arbitration should refrain from making written state-
ments or giving testimony at hearings in cases filed against Argentina, and the claimant
submitted a request for PMs in relation to the witness. Upon examination of the PMs
request, the arbitral tribunal noted that the witness was duly notified of the injunction
and did not raise any timely objection and so Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Conven-
tion could not apply to the relationship between the witness and Argentina.*” How-

ever, in granting the requested PM, the tribunal ordered the respondent to refrain from

853. ibid. para. 53, p. 16.

854 Tokios Tokelés (n 844).

855 Quiborax (n 762); City Oriente (n 781).

856 Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, CSTD Case No. ARB/02/16, Award (28 September 2007); and
Nova Group (n 781). See also Section 5.G,

857 Article 21 reads: “The Chairman, the members of the Administrative Council, persons acting as conciliators or arbitra-
tors or members of a Committee appointed pursuant to paragraph (3) of Article 52, and the officers and employees of
the Secretariat (a) shall enjoy immunity from legal process with respect to acts performed by them in the exercise of
their functions, except when the Centre waives this immunity; (b) not being local nationals, shall enjoy the same immu-
nities from immigration restrictions, alien registration requirements and national service obligations, the same facilities
as regards exchange restrictions and the same treatment in respect of travelling facilities as are accorded by Contracting
States to the representatives, officials and employees of comparable rank of other Contracting States.’ Article 22 reads:
“The provisions of Article 21 shall apply to persons appearing in proceedings under this Convention as parties, agents,
counsel, advocates, witnesses or experts; provided, however, that sub-paragraph (b) thereof shall apply only in connec-
tion with their travel to and from, and their stay at, the place where the proceedings are held.’

858 Sempra (n 856).

859 ibid. para. 3(a), p. 9.

455

4.557

4.558


4.559

4.560

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

any act or omission that may impair the witness’ ability to provide his testimony. The
arbitral tribunal noted that witnesses enjoy immunity from legal process with respect to

acts performed by them in the proceedings irrespective of their nationality.°°

In Teinver and others v. Argentina,**

the claimant argued that the immunity provided
applies ipso iure without a specific order of an ICSID tribunal and that it extends to
not only the claimant but also their legal counsel, their court-appointed receivers and
their funders. However, the arbitral tribunal decided that the immunity available under
Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention does not extend to third party funders.*”
Although the tribunal stated that it was not convinced that Article 22 applies to the
funder or extends to the funding agreement on the basis of the limited evidence and
argument before it, it stated that “The question of the nature and scope of the immunity
granted to parties, their counsel and the other persons referred to in Article 22 of the
ICSID Convention is a complex one, particularly when one considers the various per-
sons to whom immunities may apply in the particularly complex circumstances of this
case. In the Tribunal’s view, even assuming that only the Funding Agreement were rel-
evant to the Complaints and criminal investigation, there are serious, plausible grounds
on which some, if not all, of Claimants, their counsel, their court-appointed receivers
and their funder are entitled to immunity under Article 22 of the ICSID Convention.
However, the Tribunal need not decide this question at this stage’.*® The tribunal also
distinguished the case from the Lidananco v. Turkey case in which the Tribunal found
that the immunity under Article 22 of the ICSID Convention applied to an escrow
agent.*

(e) The preservation and production of documents

The preservation and/or the production of documentary evidence has been frequent-
ly invoked in numerous ICSID arbitrations. Whilst preservation and production of
documents is normally invoked under Article 43 of the ICSID Convention, which
provides that the arbitral tribunal may ‘call upon the parties to produce documents or
other evidence’, Article 47 of the Convention has sometimes been used by parties to

request PMs in order to secure or obtain evidence where the surrounding circumstances

860 ibid. para. 37(5), p. 10.

861 Teinver (n 757).

862. ibid. para. 216, pp. 82-83.

863. ibid. para. 220, p. 84.

864 ibid. where the tribunal stated: ‘the escrow agent in question was part of an arrangement established by the Tribunal to
permit the production and examination of share certificates relevant to the issues before the Tribunal for examination
by Respondent. The circumstances of that case were that the tribunal made specific provision for the holding of shares
to be examined for evidentiary purposes in the arbitration, which are quite different from the circumstances relevant to

the Funding Agreement in this case.’

456

ARTICLE 47

justified such a request.*® In Biwater Gauff'v. Tanzania,*® the claimant requested the
preservation and the production of certain categories of documents, and the arbitral
tribunal confirmed that such right is protected by PMs. The tribunal held that ‘[t]he
purpose of provisional measures is to induce behavior by the parties that is conducive
to a successful outcome of the proceedings such as securing discovery of evidence’ .**’ The
tribunal was of the opinion that the requirements of urgency and necessity are met for
the potential need for the evidence in question as it is likely that the examination of the
merits will require consideration of evidence that is currently in Tanzania and beyond
BGT’s possession, custody or control. The tribunal also added that ‘there is a need for
such evidence to be preserved before the proceedings progress any further (e.g. to enable
each party properly to plead their respective cases)’.°* In its decision, the arbitral tribu-
nal granted the PM request, in part, under Article 47 as it found that the surrounding
circumstances so justify. However, it examined the remaining part under Article 43 and
validly highlighted that ‘the danger of allowing Article 47 as a method of obtaining dis-
closure of documents is that this might be deployed to circumvent other procedures — in
this case the detailed mechanism for two exchanges of document requests. Although
there may be instances in which document production could be ordered’.6”

In Nova v. Romania,*”

the claimant requested, in¢er alia, the tribunal to order the re- 4.561
spondent to: (i) preserve all documents potentially relevant to the arbitration in the
possession of the national body; and (ii) reconstruct any lost data potentially relevant
to the arbitration in the possession of the national body. The tribunal noted that the
claimant depended on a news article that the electronic document depository of the
national body had been destroyed following a crash, but rejected the request on the
basis of an internal report of the national body assuring that the crash did not affect the
electronic or the hard copies of the documents. The tribunal was also of the opinion that
the respondent undertook all reasonable measures necessary and so there was no basis

to grant the order to preserve or recover any data that is relevant to the arbitration.*”

(f) The right to specific performance
The right to specific performance is rarely invoked under Article 47 of the ICSID Con- 4.562
vention. In Burlington Resources v. Ecuador,*” the parties disputed the admissibility of

the right to specific performance under both international law and the Ecuadorian law,

865 See Section 5.D.

866 Biwater Gauff(n 780).

867 ibid. para. 21, p. 67.

868 ibid. para. 25, p. 86.

869 ibid. para. 101, p. 29.

870 Nova Group (n 781).

871 ibid. para. 362, p.135.

872 Burlington Resources (n 761).

457

4.563

4.564

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

and the arbitral tribunal established admissibility in international law and cited Article
35 of the International Law Commission Articles on State Responsibility providing
for ‘restitution which includes specific performance unless it is materially impossible or

wholly disproportionate’.*”

In Rizzani and others v. Kuwait,’ the respondent requested the tribunal to order the
claimant to continue performing the construction works and maintain all bonds re-
quired by the project, but the arbitral tribunal denied both PM requests in light of
the absence of irreparable harm and the undertaking given by the claimant that it will
maintain and extend the bonds for the duration of the project.*”

In City Oriente v. Ecuador,*”*

the claimant made a number of requests to order the
respondent to refrain from demanding the payment of certain amounts pursuant to
a newly enacted law and to refrain from unilaterally terminating the contract by ad-
ministrative proceedings and both requests were granted. The tribunal noted that: ‘In
the opinion of this Arbitral Tribunal, the provisional measures requested by Claimant are
necessary to safeguard Claimants rights and the claims it has asserted in this arbitration.
Indeed, City Oriente is seeking an order to have the Contract performed pursuant to
its original terms and conditions. Ecuador and Petroecuador understand that the rights
and obligations arising from the Contract have not been affected or modified as a re-
sult of the application of Law No 2006-42, which is to be enforced on its own terms.
Respondents may or may not be right — an issue pertaining to the merits on which the
Tribunal cannot and should not rule at this time. However, while the matter is being
resolved, the principle that neither party may aggravate or extend the dispute or take justice
into their own hands prevails. Consequently, Ecuador and Petroecuador shall continue
to comply with the obligations that they voluntarily undertook in the Contract, pursu-
ant to the agreed upon terms, and they must refrain from declaring its termination or
otherwise modifying its content.”*’’ Concerning the specific issue of the administrative
termination of the contract by the government, the tribunal noted that ‘Such termina-
tion proceeding needs to be stayed since, pursuant to the Contract, all disputes between

the parties are to be settled through arbitration [...]’.°”

873. ibid. para. 70, p. 22.

874 Rizzani(n 764).

875 ibid. para. 149, p. 64.

876 City Oriente (n 781).

877 ibid. paras 57-59, pp. 11-12.
878 ibid. para. 60, p. 13.

458

ARTICLE 47

(g) The right to ICSID arbitration conducted in good faith

Though possibly recognizable as a right to be protected by PMs, it is not frequently
invoked and the nature and scope of such right has not been sufficiently clarified and
defined in ICSID awards. It is submitted that such right pertains to the procedural
integrity of the arbitral proceedings.

In Teinver and others v. Argentina,*” the tribunal did not discuss the notion of the right
itself; it discussed the arguments of the parties and stipulated a number of observations
and questions in relation to the nature of the actions of the State and its potential effect

on the procedural integrity of the proceedings. The claimant argued that,

Respondent’s conduct in filing the Complaints and commencing the criminal investi-
gation breaches its duty to arbitrate in good faith and threatens the integrity of these
ICSID proceedings. In essence [...] the Complaints and the criminal investigation are
guerrilla tactics employed in bad faith by Respondent in order to derail this arbitration
and avoid having to pay an award rendered against it.*°

However, the Respondent argued that it ‘has the right and duty to investigate criminal

conduct where it has a legitimate basis to suspect that the same has occurred’.**!

The tribunal recognized two established principles in international law: first, that the
‘Respondent clearly has the sovereign right to conduct criminal investigations and it
will usually require exceptional circumstances to justify the granting of provisional
measures to suspend criminal proceedings by a State’, and second, ‘where exceptional
circumstances do exist and threaten the integrity of the arbitration proceedings and
the principle of due process, provisional measures may be warranted’.**? However, the
tribunal decided that good faith plays a role in striking the balance between the two
principles of State sovereignty and the procedural integrity of the ICSID proceedings.
‘The tribunal also stated that ‘abuse of the sovereign power of a State to pursue criminal
proceedings may give rise to damage and a claim for the breach of rights protected by a

BIT or international law’.?®

(h) Confidentiality of the proceedings
Whilst confidentiality is recognized in the context of commercial arbitration subject

to the applicable rules and laws, investment arbitration tribunals functioning under

879 Teinver (n 757).
880 ibid. para. 188, p. 72.
881. ibid.

882. ibid. para. 190, p. 73.
883 ibid.

459

4.565

4.566

4.567

4.568

4.569


4.570

4.571

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

different treaties and rules frequently addressed issues of confidentiality.*** In this re-
spect, the existence of a general duty of confidentiality in investment arbitration re-
mains debatable, but the general inclination is that confidentiality may not preclude
a State or other party from discussing the case in public, and the general public may
not be deprived of the knowledge and information relating to public affairs.*® This is
indeed consistent with the modern trends of transparency in treaty-based arbitrations
that culminated in the conclusion of the United Nations Convention on Transpar-
ency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration (the ‘2014 Mauritius Convention on
Transparency’),*** but it has not yet gained the anticipated global support by the major-
ity of States.

In the specific context of ICSID, confidentiality remains acknowledged and parties
have requested PMs to protect the confidentiality of proceedings, though calls for more
transparency are on the rise. ICSID arbitral tribunals have recognized the competing
requirements of confidentiality and transparency and have held that the Convention
and the Rules (i) do not prevent the parties from revealing their case;**’ and (ii) do not
contain an express restriction with regard to the parties’ freedom to speak about the
arbitration in public. In this regard, the tribunal of Amco v. Indonesia*™ stated that ‘as to
the “spirit of confidentiality” of the arbitral procedure, it is right to say that the Conven-

tion and the Rules do not prevent the Parties from revealing their case [.. .]’.°°

In the specific cases where arbitral tribunals granted PMs pertaining to the confidenti-
ality of certain documents or the proceedings, the right of the procedural integrity and
non-aggravation of the dispute played considerable role in facilitating such orders. For

example, in Biwater Gauffv. Tanzania,”

the claimant requested the confidentiality of
certain categories of documents on the basis of the procedural integrity of the proceed-

ings and the non-aggravation of the dispute. ‘The arbitral tribunal affirmed that in case

884 Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, |CSID Case No. ARB/(AF)/97/1, Decision on a Request by the Re-
spondent for an Order Prohibiting the Claimant from Revealing Information Regarding Case ARB/(AF)/97/1 (27
October 1997) (under NAFTA rules); The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. USA, ICSTD Case ARB
(AF) 98/3, Decision on Hearing of Respondent’s Objection to Competence and Jurisdiction (5 January 2001) (under
NAFTA tules); Ameo Asia (n 797); S.D. Myers Inc v. Canada, Procedural Order No. 16, Ad hoce-UNCITRAL Abbitra-
tion Rules, signed 13 May 2000 as all cited by Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania, CSTD
Case No. ARB/05/22, Procedural Order No. 3 (29 September 2006).

885 The Loewen Group (n 884) paras 24-28 as cited by Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Procedural Order No. 3 (29 September 2006).

886 United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Status, United Nations Convention on Transpar-
ency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration (New York, 2014) <www.uncitral.org/uncitral/en/uncitral_texts/
arbitration/2014Transparency_Convention_status.html> (accessed 8 July 2018).

887 See Amco v. Indonesia, ICSTD Case ARB/81/1, Decision on Provisional Measures (9 December 1983), 1 ICSID Re-
ports 412, 410, para. 4 as cited by Biwater Gauff(n 885).

888 Ameo v. Indonesia, ICSTD Case ARB/81/1, Award (4 October 2006), para. 16, p. 7.

889 ibid.

890 Biwater Gauff(n 885).

460

ARTICLE 47

the parties agreed on the confidentiality of the proceedings, such agreement will give
rise to rights ‘that are susceptible of protection by way of provisional measures or other
appropriate relief’.*”' The arbitral tribunal also referred to the evolution of the ICSID
rules towards more transparency, stressing that there are only three provisions in the
ICSID Convention and Administrative and Financial Rules that provide limitation on
the transparency of the proceedings and they mainly relate to arbitral tribunals and the
ICSID secretariat and not the parties.°”

(i) The right to enforceable award under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention

This right has not been frequently invoked in the context of PMs and there is no prop-
erly developed jurisprudence in this regard. Mostly, it has been associated with the
right not to pre-judge the merits of the case or mentioned after stipulating the right of
maintenance of the satus quo and non-aggravation of the dispute. However, the newly
proposed amendments to the ICSID rules explicitly grant the tribunals the right to
‘prevent action that is likely to cause: (ii) prejudice to the arbitral process’ as a right to be

protected by means of provisional measures.*”

In Teinver and others v. Argentina,*™ the claimant stated that ‘an aspect of the integrity
of the proceedings is their right to an enforceable award under Article 53 of the ICSID
Convention’,®® and it supported its argument by stating that ‘the purpose of the Com-
plaints and criminal investigation is to prevent the enforcement of any award rendered
against Respondent by de-legitimizing this arbitration and any award’.*”* The arbitral
tribunal did not deny that such right deserves protection by means of PMs. However,
the tribunal rejected the argument that such right was at risk, since: (i) the scope of the
arbitration is different from the scope of the criminal proceedings, and (ii) both parties

agreed that the tribunal shall not be bound by the decisions of national courts.

As mentioned herein above, in Nova v. Romania,®*’ when the claimant invoked the
right of procedural integrity in its application of PMs, the tribunal noted that the right
of procedural integrity inherently includes the ability to fashion meaningful relief, if the
applicant has proven entitlement to relief and this amounts to protecting the effective-
ness of the award.*** Accordingly, the tribunal granted a protection order in regards to

891 ibid. para. 115, p.29.

892 ibid. para. 123, p. 30.

893 ‘Proposals for Amendment of the ICSID Rules — Consolidated Draft Rules’ (n 729).
894 Teinver (n 757).

895 ibid. para. 223, p.35.

896 ibid.

897 Nova Group (n 781).

898 ibid. para. 235, pp. 74-75.

461

4.572

4.573

4.574


4.575

4.576

4.577

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

one of the claimant’s ‘key representative and key witness’,*”” recommending ‘Romania
to withdraw or (or otherwise suspend the operation of ) the transmission of the Euro-
pean arrest warrant [...] and associated request for extradition [...] and refrain from re-
issuing or transmitting this or any other European Arrest Warrant or other request for
extradition [...] related to the subject matter of this arbitration until the Final Award

in this case is rendered’.?”

In Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine,” the tribunal held that ‘provisional measure may also be
P y
granted to protect a party from actions of the other party that threaten to aggravate the

dispute or prejudice the rendering or implementation of an eventual decision or award .””’

5. THETYPES OF PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Besides the specific right(s) to be preserved/protected, a party requesting a PM must
also specify the measure(s) requested under Rule 39(1). There is no exhaustive list of
PMs that may be granted by a tribunal since the nature/types of PMs are subject to the
circumstances of each case and the relevant rights to be protected. Whilst many have
voiced concerns regarding this void,””’ the absence of a list of the type of PMs that can
be granted is only natural and logical, since it is difficult to foresee all the situations that
might arise in practice and for which PMs can be ordered.” That said, I provide herein
an overview of all the types of PMs that have arisen in practice and which broadly fall
into (13) categories as discussed below.

A. Maintenance or restoration of the status quo

Maintenance of the status quo is understood to be included in Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention in the context of referring to the ‘preservation of the respective rights of
the parties’. This category of PMs includes requests aimed at prohibiting the opposing
party from taking any action that might alter the status quo of a certain movable or im-
movable property that is related to the dispute.”” This may usually come as: (i) a general
request to maintain the status quo between the parties; (ii) a specific request to refrain

899 ibid. para. 135, p.39.

900 ibid. para. 365(A), p. 137.

901 Tokios Tokelés (n 844).

902. ibid. para. 7, p. 4.

903 RSM (n 760).

904 Schreuer and others (n 3) 778.

905 See Phoenix Action Ltd v. Czech Republic, CSTD Case No. ARB/06/5, Decision on Provisional Measures (6 April
2007).

462

ARTICLE 47

from any action that may change the status of the parties;”” (iii) a request to refrain
from taking any action with regard to the corporate structure of the investment subject
of the dispute;”” (iv) a request to refrain from undertaking any action with relation to
the shares of such investment;”” (v) a request to refrain from modifying or cancelling
permits granted to the investor or the contract subject to the dispute;”” (vi) a request to

910

take actions to develop a certain property;”"° or (vii) a request to restore the status quo

that was altered by actions of the opposing party.?"!

According to the Reviewed Documents, maintenance or restoration of the status quo
was requested 24 times out of a total number of 483 PM requests submitted to ICSID
tribunals representing 4.97 per cent of the total requests. It was only fully granted in
four cases and partially granted’ in two cases with a success rate of 25 per cent of the
total requests made under this specific category.

£7

In Helnan International v. Egypt,’ the claimant requested a number of PMs aiming
at the restoration of the s/atus guo, amongst which: (i) reinstating Helnan as manager
and operator of the Hotel; (ii) not interfering with Helnan’s continuous right to man-
age and operate the hotel; and (iii) refraining from all procedures to sell the hotel or
interfere with Helnan’s right to manage and operate the hotel. In this case, the arbitral
tribunal denied all requested PMs that were identical to the relief sought by the claim-

ant on the merits and noted that they do not fall within the scope of PMs by nature.

However, in Spyridon Roussalis v. Romania,’ the tribunal granted the claimant request
to maintain the status guo and issued a decision ‘directing that Claimant does not sell or
alienate any property belonging to Continent SA, without prejudice to all substantive

issues in dispute’?

906 Burlington Resources (n 761).

907 Azurix Corp. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSTD Case No. ARB/01/12, Award (14 July 2006) para. 13, p. 6.

908 ABCI Investments Limited v. Republic of Tunisia, ICSTD Case No. ARB/04/12, Decision on Jurisdiction (18 February
2011).

909 International Quantum Resources Limited, Frontier SPRL and Compagnie Miniére de Sakania SPRL v. Democratic Repub-
lic of the Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/21, Procedural Order No. 1 (1 July 2011).

910 See Tethyan Copper Company Pty Limited v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, CSTD Case No. ARB/12/1, Decision on
Claimant Request for Provisional Measures (13 December 2012).

911 See Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSTD Case No. ARB/05/19, Decision on Claimant’s
Request for Provisional Measures (17 May 2006).

912 Throughout this commentary, the term ‘partially granted’ in relation to a PM denotes either: (i) limiting the scope of the
granted PM; or (ii) granting a different PM aimed at protecting the same right.

913. ibid.

914 Spyridon Roussalis v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/1, Award (7 December 2011).

915 ibid. para. 24, p. 3.

463

4.578

4.579

4.580


4.581

4.582

4.583

4.584

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

Also, in International Quantum v. Congo,’'® the claimant requested maintenance of the
status quo through various actions and requests, including: ordering the respondent not
to transfer permits; to refrain, directly or indirectly through any entity controlled by it
from cancelling the permits; to submit for tender any mineral deposit located within
the perimeter of the permits; and to refrain from taking any measure that could further
affect the rights of Frontier and Comisa under the permits until the Tribunal has is-
sued a final award. Having considered all requests, the tribunal partially granted the
requested PMs, noting that: (i) the first item was not decided by the tribunal as the
respondent declared that it has no intention to cancel permits; (ii) the third and fourth
items were rejected; and (iii) the second item (i.e. preventing the respondent, directly or
indirectly through any entity controlled by it from transferring, in whole or in part, any min-
ing title or right located within the parameters covered by the permits, or granting, issuing
or transferring any further or other rights within perimeters covered by the permits) was

partially granted.
B. Non-aggravation of the dispute

It is a well-established general principle under the ICSID system that parties should
not aggravate or exacerbate their dispute. This category includes requests where the
status quo is changing or developing and a party is requested not to interfere in this
status quo in any way that would compromise the developing status quo or aggravate the
situation between the parties.

According to the Reviewed Documents, non-aggravation of the dispute was requested
50 times out of a total number of 483 PM requests submitted to ICSID tribunals repre-
senting 10.35 per cent of the total requests. However, it was only fully granted in seven
cases and partially granted in 11 cases with a success rate of 36 per cent of the total

requests made under this specific category.

This principle was first recognized in the ICSID jurisprudence in Victor Pey Casado v.
Chile where the arbitral tribunal stated that its mission was to reduce the tension that
existed between the parties or at least prevent its aggravation during the proceedings.?"”
The tribunal also affirmed that ‘each party to a case is obliged to abstain from every act

or omission likely to aggravate the case or to render the execution of the judgment more

difficult’.

916 International Quantum Resources Limited, Frontier SPRL and Compagnie Miniére de Sakania SPRL v. Democratic Repub-
lic of the Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/21, Procedural Order No. 1 (1 July 2011).

917 Victor Pey Casado(n 740) as cited by Rizzani (n 764).

918 ibid.

464

ARTICLE 47

In Burlington Resources v. Ecuador, the tribunal struck a fair balance in granting the
claimant’s request. It stated that the ‘Parties shall refrain from any conduct that may
lead to an aggravation of the dispute until the Award or the reconsideration of this
order. In particular, Burlington Oriente shall refrain from making good on its threat to
abandon the project and Ecuador shall refrain from any action that may induce Burl-

ington Oriente to do so’.””

Similarly, in Rizzani and others v. Kuwait, the tribunal stated that the parties are expect-
ed to be ‘aware of their obligations not to aggravate the dispute in the course of these

arbitration proceedings and that they will act in compliance with those obligations’.
C. Confidentiality of the ICSID proceedings

Requests to maintain confidentiality under Article 47 are usually based on the right to
safeguard the procedural integrity of the proceedings and the non-aggravation of the
dispute.””' The dissemination of information or material related to the arbitration dur-
ing its pendency may result in the aggravation of the dispute and/or the deterioration
of the relation between the parties. It may also attract ‘trial by media’ of either parties
and/or may also trigger the involvement of NGOs and experts through amicus curiae
applications, and all this may risk the aggravation of the dispute and/or may negatively
impact the procedural integrity of the proceedings.

According to the Reviewed Documents, confidentiality of the proceedings was re-
quested 17 times out of a total number of 483 PM requests submitted to ICSID tribu-
nals representing 3.52 per cent of the total requests. However, it was only fully granted
in four cases and partially granted in five cases with a success rate of 52.94 per cent of
the total requests made under this specific category.

In Amco v. Indonesia, the arbitral tribunal affirmed that the ICSID Convention and
ICSID Rules do not prevent the parties from revealing their case or discussing the arbi-
tration.”” In World Duty Free v. Kenya,”* the arbitral tribunal discussed, when examin-
ing the PMs request to make the arbitration proceedings confidential, whether a party

to the arbitration has the right to disseminate the minutes and the audio recordings of

919 Burlington Resources (n 761) section IV Order, para. 8, p. 29.

920 Rizzani(n 764) para. 133, p.57.

921 Biwater Gauff(n 885).

922 See Amco v. Indonesia, 1CSID Case ARB/81/1, Decision on Provisional Measures, 9 December 1983, 1 ICSID Reports
412, 410, para. 4 as cited by Biwater Gauff(n 885).

923 Ameo v. Indonesia, ICSID Case ARB/81/1, Decision on Provisional Measures, 9 December 1983, 1 ICSID Reports
412, 410, para. 4 as cited by Biwater Gauff(n 885) para. 126, p. 57.

924 World Duty Free v. Kenya, CSTD Case No. ARB/00/7, award (4 October 2006).

465

4.585

4.586

4.587

4.588

4.589


4.590

4.591

4.592

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

the hearing sessions to the press without permission from the tribunal or an agreement
with the other party. The tribunal was of the view that ‘when no decision has been taken
to open the hearings to the public, the records of such hearings should not be dissemi-

nated unilaterally by one of the Parties’.””

D. Preservation and production of evidence/documents

Whilst the preservation and production of documents is regulated under Article 43
of the ICSID Convention, Article 47 thereof is sometimes also invoked by parties to
request PMs to secure or obtain evidence. Most requests under this category are to pre-
serve and produce certain documents that were originally in the possession of the other

party, and it also includes requests to:

(i) preserve documents that already belonged to the requesting party but were seized;

(ii) produce a copy or return the original copy of the seized documents or make them
available;

(iii) produce certain evidence, such as videos of the raids of premises of claimants;

(iv) produce a list of the seized documents by the respondent;

(v) inform/notify/update the tribunal as to (1) the current status of certain assets/
seized physical assets; (2) the steps taken to implement the PMs granted; or (3) the
steps to be taken or already taken as to a disputed asset (e.g. company’s shares); and

(vi) give notice to the claimant or the tribunal before taking certain measures.

According to the Reviewed Documents, preservation and production of documents, as
a PM, was requested 57 times out of a total number of 483 PM requests submitted to
ICSID tribunals representing 11.8 per cent of the total requests. However, it was only
fully granted in 13 cases and partially granted in two cases with a success rate of 26 per
cent of the total requests made under this specific category.

In Biwater v. Tanzania,”°

the claimant requested the production of documents and cor-
respondence as a PM under Article 47. The request was granted but the tribunal noted
that such requests for production of documents should, as a general rule, be considered
under Article 43 of the Convention, save in exceptional circumstances where they could
be considered under Article 47.””’ The tribunal found the claimant’s request to preserve
evidence was reasonable, since the requirements of ‘necessity’ and ‘urgency’ had been
met and there was a potential need to preserve the evidence to enable the parties to

plead their cases. However, whilst the Biwarer tribunal was very flexible, this is not

925 ibid. para. 16, p. 7.
926 Biwater Gauff(n 780).
927 ibid. para. 77, p.23 and paras 100-02, pp. 28-29.

466

ARTICLE 47

always the case. Usually, when tribunals are faced with broad production/preservation of
document requests in absence of urgency or necessity, they tend to directly reject them

without examining whether such a request could be granted under another provision.”

In Abaclat v. Argentina,” after the withdrawal of a number of claimants from the pro-
ceedings, they requested the deletion of the information and documents relating to
such claimants and the respondent requested the protection and the preservation of
such documents through a PM request. The arbitral tribunal granted this request as
‘in view of preserving Respondent’s rights of defense and ensuring the integrity of the
proceedings, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to recommend that Claimants re-
frain from deleting and/or destroying any information and/or documents relating to
Claimants having allegedly withdrawn from the proceedings, until further order from
the Tribunal’.”°

In Railroad Development v. Guatemala,” the claimant requested the preservation of
four categories of documents, but the arbitral tribunal rejected the request, noting that
‘the categories of documents requested and reproduced [. . .] are excessively broad and

their relevance difficult to assess’.?*?

E. Stay of parallel domestic and arbitral proceedings

The avoidance or stay of parallel proceedings before domestic courts and/or arbitral
tribunals forms the largest category of requested PMs in ICSID proceedings.” This
category of PM requests is mostly founded on the right to exclusive jurisdiction of

ICSID enshrined in Article 26 of the ICSID Convention and it also aims at safeguard-
ing the procedural integrity of ICSID proceedings and non-aggravation of the dispute.

This category includes a variety of requested measures mostly undertaken by States,

including:

(i) injunctions for the stay or termination of parallel domestic arbitral proceedings;
and

928 Phoenix Action (n 780); Railroad Development (n 738).

929 Abaclat and others v. Argentine Republic, CSTD Case No. ARB/07/5, Procedural Order No. 11 (27 June 2012) para. 21,
p.5.

930. ibid.

931 Railroad Development (n 738).

932. ibid. para. 33, p. 16.

933 See Schreuer and others (n 3) 784 citing I. F I. Shihata and A. R. Parra, “The Experience of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes’ (1999) 14 ICSID Rev — FIL] 299, 325-26.

ay

467

4.593

4.594

4.595

4.596


4.597

4.598

4.599

4.600

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

(ii) injunctions for the stay or termination of local judicial (civil, commercial and/or
criminal) or administrative proceedings and this in turn includes: non-interference
in the proceedings pending in other States,”** and/or withdrawal of domestic pro-

ceedings before the courts of other States.

According to the Reviewed Documents, stay of parallel domestic and arbitral proceed-
ings was requested 105 times out of a total number of 483 PM requests submitted to
ICSID tribunals representing 21.74 per cent of the total requests. However, it was fully
granted in 21 cases and partially granted in eight cases with a success rate of 26.67 per

cent of the total requests made under this specific category.

In Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, the arbitral tribunal affirmed ‘the right guaranteed by Arti-
cle 26 to have the ICSID arbitration the exclusive remedy for the dispute to the exclu-

sion of any other remedy, whether domestic or international, judicial or administrative.»

Specifically, in relation to the stay of domestic judicial proceedings, this sub-category
entails the suspension, withdrawal and/or non-initiation of these proceedings insofar
as the ICSID proceedings are pending.”** Under this sub-category, nighty-seven PM
requests were made, only 20 were fully granted and eight partially granted.

In the beginning ICSID tribunals were reluctant to grant requests to stay national
judicial proceedings pending ICSID arbitrations,*”’ but the practice has changed if the
requesting party has shown good cause and fulfilment of the required conditions, espe-
cially in light of Article 26 of the ICSID Convention. In Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine,’?
the claimant requested the suspension of parallel court proceedings in Ukraine as well
as the investigations conducted by the Ukrainian tax authorities (i.e. ‘stay of judicial and
administrative proceedings’). In granting those PMs, the arbitral tribunal relied on
Article 26 of the ICSID Convention.” The tribunal adopted a broad view as to what
constitutes ‘parallel domestic proceedings’, and held that ‘According to this basic

934 See the cases of Caratube International Oil Company LLP and Devincci Salah Hourani v. Republic of Kazakhstan, CSTD
Case No. ARB/13/13, Decision on the Claimant Request for Provisional Measures (4 December 2014); and EuroGas
Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic, CSTD Case No. ARB/14/14, Procedural Order No. 7 (5 September
2016).

935 Tokios Tokelés (n 844) para. 7, p. 4.

936 Tokios Tokelés (n 819) para. 2(b), p. 3.

937 See Malintoppi (n 769) 175.

938 See Holiday Inns (n 817) as cited in Schreuer and others (n 3) paras 101-02, pp. 784-85.

939 Tokios Tokelés (n 819).

940 ibid. The nature of the request is clarified in the subsequent Decision on Jurisdiction dated 29 April 2004.

941 The arbitral tribunal quoted para. 32 of Report of the Executive Directors, which stated that ‘[I]t may be presumed that
when a State and an investor agree to have recourse to arbitration, and do not reserve the right to have recourse to other
remedies or require the prior exhaustion of local remedies, the intention of the parties is to have recourse to arbitration

to the exclusion of any other remedy’. Tokios Tokelés (n 819) para. 1, p. 2.

468

ARTICLE 47

principle, ICSID tribunals have repeatedly ruled: (a) that the parties to a dispute over
which ICSID has jurisdiction must refrain from any measure capable of having a preju-
dicial effect on the rendering or implementation of an eventual ICSID award or deci-
sion, and in general refrain from any action of any kind which might aggravate or extend
the dispute or render its resolution more difficult, and (b) that the parties must withdraw
or stay any and all judicial proceedings commenced before national jurisdictions and refrain
from commencing any further such proceedings in connection with the dispute before the IC-
SID tribunal?” (emphasis added).

In CSOB v. Slovakia,” the arbitral tribunal intelligently opted to add a pre-requisite to
granting the request PM, that is: informing the national court of the ongoing ICSID
proceeding in order to give the court an opportunity to voluntarily stay the proceedings
in accordance with the international treaty obligations that bind Slovakia and the Bra-
tislava Court.’** However, after denying the claimant’s requested PM twice and upon
the rejection of the stay of the bankruptcy proceedings by the national court, the ICSID
tribunal granted the stay of the national proceedings ‘to the extent that such proceed-
ings might include determinations as to whether “the claimant has a valid claim”.’*
The tribunal merely referred to Article 26 of the ICSID Convention providing for the
exclusive jurisdiction of the ICSID tribunals, as a ground for granting the requested
PM under Article 47."

With respect to the stay ‘parallel domestic criminal proceedings’, ICSID tribunals seem
to accept a limited power in this respect for a number of reasons: first, criminal proceed-
ings do not usually fall under the description ‘parallel’ as their subject matter usually
differs from the subject matter of the ICSID arbitrations. Second, the principle of State
sovereignty and the right of the State to prosecute criminal activities within its territory
militate against an unrestrained power by ICSID tribunals in this regard.

Thus, whilst the stay or termination of criminal proceedings remains difficult to attain
through PMs, ICSID tribunals tend to grant the stay of criminal proceedings to the ex-
tent needed to urgently protect personnel and entities threatened by criminal proceed-
ings, insofar as this may negatively impact the pending ICSID proceedings or threaten
a party's right to have its claims fairly determined. In Teinver and others v. Argentina,

the claimant requested the arbitral tribunal to order Argentina to ‘restore the status

942 ibid. para. 2, pp. 2-3.

943 Ceskoslovensko Obchodni Banka AS v. The Republic of Slovakia, CSTD Case No. ARB/97/4, Procedural Order No. 2 (9
September 1998), Procedural Order No. 3 (9 November 1998), and Procedural Order No. 4 (11 January 1999).

944 ibid.

945 ibid. Procedural Order No. 4 (11 January 1999), para. 1, p. 2.

946 ibid.

469

4.601

4.602

4.603


4.604

4.605

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

quo ante’ by ceasing and desisting the ‘criminal investigation’. The tribunal held that it
‘is aware of the distinction which has been drawn by other ICSID tribunals between claims
under a BIT relating to the protection of an investment and criminal prosecutions brought
by a State in respect of crimes alleged to have been committed in its territory. The Tribunal is
also aware of the decisions of other tribunals which have expressed the view that pro-
visional measures are an extraordinary remedy and that tribunals should exercise particular
caution when asked to restrain a sovereign States exercise of its right to conduct criminal in-
vestigations and prosecutions relating to conduct within its territory .°”” However, the same
tribunal noted that ‘such powers must be exercised in good faith, respecting a claimant’s
rights to have its claims fairly considered and decided by an arbitral tribunal’ (emphasis
added). The same tribunal also noted that ‘[.. .] the abuse of the sovereign power of a
State to pursue criminal proceedings may give rise to damage and a claim for the breach

of rights protected by a BIT or international law’.””

In Quiborax and Non-Metallic v. Bolivia,’ the respondent State initiated criminal pro-
ceedings against the claimant’s personnel and the claimant requested the stay of crimi-
nal proceedings on the basis of the following rights: (i) the right to preservation of the
status quo and the non-aggravation of the dispute; (ii) the right to exclusivity of the
ICSID proceedings in accordance with Article 26 of the ICSID Convention; and (iii)
the right to procedural integrity of the arbitration. The tribunal granted the request on
the basis that ‘the harm that such a stay would cause to Bolivia is proportionately less
than the harm caused to Claimants if the criminal proceedings were to continue their
course’,””' yet the tribunal recognized the respondent’s sovereign power to prosecute

criminal conduct on its own territory.’”

Concerning the ‘stay of administrative proceedings’, this sub-category is not frequently
invoked as PMs before ICSID tribunals and the threshold for granting such stay seems
to be difficult to meet. Under this sub-category, only frve requests were made, and most-

ly, they were not granted, but the variants of administrative proceedings include:

(a) suspension of the execution, non-execution of or lifting the application of certain

executive/judicial decisions;?*

947 Teinver (n 757) para. 185, p.71.

948 ibid. para. 185, p.71.

949 ibid. para. 190, p. 73.

950 Quiborax (n 762).

951 ibid. para. 165, p. 45. It is indeed interesting how the arbitral tribunal utilized the notion of ‘proportionality’ to assess
and balance the parties’ competing interests in granting the stay of the criminal proceedings, whilst acknowledging the
State’s sovereign right to prosecute criminal activities on its territory.

952. ibid. para. 123, p.35.

953 loan Micula, Viorel Micula and others v. Romania, 1CSTD Case No. ARB/05/20, Award (11 December 2013).

470

ARTICLE 47

(b) suspension of certain administrative proceedings that affect the investment subject
of the dispute;?** and
(c) suspension/withdrawal of investigations undertaken by national administrative au-

thorities, such as tax authorities.”

In City Oriente v. Ecuador Petroecuador,** the arbitral tribunal granted the requested
PMs and ordered the respondents to, inter alia, ‘refrain from Instituting or prosecuting,
if already in place, any judicial proceeding or action of any nature whatsoever against or
involving City Oriente Limited and/or its officers or employees and arising from or in
connection with the Contract of March 29, 1995 and/or the effects of the application of Law
No. 2006-42, the Law Amending the Hydrocarbon Law, to said Contract?’ (emphasis
added).

In Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine,’** the arbitral tribunal initially granted the stay of parallel
domestic proceedings in general, including the court proceedings and the investigation
undertaken by tax authorities after being convinced that the surrounding circumstances
so warrant.’ However, a differently constituted tribunal rejected the claimant’s second
request to suspend the tax investigation undertaken by the Ukrainian tax authority on
the basis of a narrow technical distinction between ‘proceedings’ and ‘investigations’.””
Nevertheless, the tribunal affirmed that it does not rule out that investigations may give

rise to a need for PMs if the conditions for granting the same are satisfied.”*'
F. Stay of pending ICSID proceedings

In a few cases, a party requested the stay of the ICSID arbitration until a certain event

happens, such as: (a) compliance of the other party with certain provisional measures;

954 Tokios Tokelés (n 844).

955 Togo Electricité and GDF-Suex Energie Services v. Republic of Togo, CSTD Case No. ARB/06/7, Award (10 August
2010).

956 City Oriente (n 781).

957 ibid. p.20.

958 Tokios Tokelés (n 819 and n 844),

959 The wording of Procedural Order No. 1 dated 1 July 2003 granting the stay of parallel proceedings was very vague. It
neither stipulated the claimants request nor clarified the nature of the proceedings the stay of which was requested. The
tribunal rather made a general comment that proceedings include judicial and any other proceedings without making
explicitly mentioning administrative proceedings. Eventually, the tribunal made a general recommendation granting
the stay of all parallel domestic proceedings. See Tokios Tokelés (n 819).

960 ‘The tribunal stated: ‘the ordinary meaning of “proceedings,” which is “[t]he fact or manner of taking legal action,”
whereas “investigation” is defined as “[t]he action or process of investigating; systematic examination.” An investiga-
tion typically precedes the institution of proceedings. As the two words have distinct meanings that do not overlap, we
conclude that “investigations” are not covered by Order No. 1, and Respondent, therefore, is not presently in violation
of that Order’. Tokios Tokelés (n 844).

961 ibid. para. 17, p. 8.

471

4.606

4.607

4.608


4.609

4.610

4.611

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

or (b) the conclusion of certain domestic proceedings.” According to the Reviewed
Documents, stay of ICSID proceedings was requested three times out of a total number
of 483 PM requests submitted to ICSID tribunals, representing 0.62 per cent of the
total requests. However, it has not been granted as a PM, hence the success rate is 0 per

cent.

In MOL Hungarian v. Croatia,’ the respondent requested the stay of the present arbi-
tration proceedings until: (1) the criminal proceedings against the prime minister have
been fully resolved and concluded, and (2) the UNCITRAL claims have been decided.
However, the arbitral tribunal rejected this request.” In Lighthouse and others v. Timor-
Leste,*® the respondent requested that the claimants post security for costs and stay the
ICSID arbitration until the claimants comply with such request. The arbitral tribunal
rejected this request and only discussed the request to post security for costs. It is worth
noting that the newly proposed amendments to the ICSID rules allow such measure
to be granted in case of failure to post the ordered security.” So, it will be interesting
to see how and when arbitral tribunals may suspend pending ICSID proceedings for

failure to provide security for costs.
G. Protection orders

ICSID practice has shown that many PM requests pertain to the protection of certain
personnel of one party, usually the claimant, from any arbitrary measures taken by the
other party, usually the State, such as: illegitimate restrictions on a person's rights (i.e.
restrictions on movement, travel, etc.) or abusive physical measures (i.e. physical harass-

ment, unwarranted confinement, efe. ).

According to the Reviewed Documents, this category of protection orders was request-
ed 26 times out of a total number of 483 PM requests submitted to ICSID tribunals

representing 5.38 per cent of the total requests but was fully granted six times and

962 See Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1 Ltd. v. Republic of Peru (ICSTD Case No. ARB/03/28) as cited in
Lucy Reed, Jan Paulsson, and Nigel Blackaby, Guide to ICSID Arbitration (2nd edn, Kluwer 2011) 423, Lighthouse Cor-
poration Pty Ltd and Lighthouse Corporation Ltd, IBC v. Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, ICSTD Case No. ARB/15/2,
Procedural Order No. 2 Decision on Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures (13 February 2016); MOL
Hungarian Oil and Gas Company Plev. Republic of Croatia, ICSTD Case No. ARB/13/32, Decision on the Respondent’s
pteliminary objections pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5) (2 December 2014).

963 MOL Hungarian Oil (n 962).

964 ibid.

965 Lighthouse Corporation (n 962).

966 ‘The rule in the 2018 proposed amendments reads as follows ‘Security for Costs (...) (4) Ifa party fails to comply with
an order for security for costs, the Tribunal may suspend the proceeding until the security is provided. If the proceeding
is suspended for more than 90 days, the Tribunal may, after consulting with the parties, order the discontinuance of the

proceeding’ (emphasis added).

472

ARTICLE 47

partially granted three times with a success rate of 34.62 per cent of the total requests
made under this specific category.

In Border Timbers and others v. Zimbabwe,”

the claimant applied for urgent protection
measures in relation to an alleged plan by the respondent’s ‘Central Intelligence Or-
ganisation to kill one of the claimants. The arbitral tribunal granted the requested PM
on its own initiative and ordered the respondent to report twice on the updates on the
protection measures undertaken by respondent. The tribunal also concluded that ‘the
measures which the Claimants seek, in the view of the Tribunal, are urgent and neces-
sary since any action of any member, organ or agent of the Respondent or any person
or entity instructed by the Respondent which could endanger the life and safety of the
Claimants [...] is capable of causing irreparable prejudice to their right to participate in the

present proceedings”®* (emphasis added).
H. Pre-award security/financial guarantee

This category includes all requests to provide financial security to guarantee the pay-
ment, in whole or in part, of the administrative/legal costs of the arbitration or the
potential award granting financial relief to the requesting party. The most common
form of request under this category is the provision of financial guarantees or posting
of security for costs. However, this category does not include requests to make immedi-
ate payments based on contractual obligations. It is now common in many cases that a
party requesting PMs also requests the provision of security for costs as part of its PM
application. It is even more frequent that pre-award security requests are submitted by
the respondent States. Traditionally, tribunals usually either postponed this request till
the conclusion of the arbitration or simply rejected it on the basis that such request does
not easily qualify as a PM.”

As such, requests for ordering the counterparty to post financial securities/guarantees
have not been easily granted by ICSID tribunals. Tribunals have been reluctant to grant
security for costs based on a number of grounds, including: (1) the right to a future
award is hypothetical; (2) the request includes a hypothetical scenario that the losing
party will fail to meet a future award on costs or on the merits;?”° and/or (3) Article
47 of the ICSID Convention did not specify security for costs as a PM that can be
granted.?”!

967 Border Timbers (n 770).

968 ibid. para. 62, p.17.

969 Nova Group (n 781) para. 365(i), p. 139.

970 RSM (n 760) (dissenting opinion of judge Edward W. Nottingham).
971 ibid.

473

4.612

4.613

4.614


4.615

4.616

4.617

4.618

4.619

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

According to the Reviewed Documents, this category of PMs was requested 42 times
out of a total number of 483 PM requests submitted to ICSID tribunals representing
8.7 per cent of the total requests, but was granted five times only (four of which were
granted at the initiative of the tribunal and only one was based on a party’s request) with a
success rate of 11.9 per cent of the total requests made under this specific category.

Security for costs was granted for the first time — based on a party’s request — in 2014
by the majority of the tribunal in the RSM v. Saint Lucia case.”” However, in Perenco v.
Ecuador,” where the arbitral tribunal granted the claimant’s PM requests that prevents
Ecuador from collecting an enhanced payment required under a newly enacted law, the
tribunal struck a balance between the rights and interests of both parties and took the
initiative in ordering the claimant to deposit the sums due under the newly enacted law

in an escrow account by way of security.
I. Non-enforcement of a legislative act

This category includes requests for the stay or the non-enforcement of a legislative act.
Such legislative act may be a newly promulgated law or ministerial decision of regula-

tory nature, but it is not a commonly requested PM.

According to the Reviewed Documents, this category of PMs was requested 11 times
out of a total number of 483 PM requests submitted to ICSID tribunals representing
2.28 per cent of the total requests, but was granted three times only, with a success rate
of 27 per cent of the total requests made under this specific category.

In City Oriente v. Ecuador,””*

the claimant requested PMs aimed at the non-enforce-
ment of a newly enacted legislation and the tribunal, in granting the PM, held that
‘First, the Tribunal reiterates once more its respect for the sovereign powers of the Re-

public of Ecuador and the right to dispose of its natural resources pursuant to any laws

972 ibid. In this specific case, the respondent supported its request for security for costs as PM by the following: (i) the
claimant had initiated a previous ICSID proceeding where it failed to honour the costs award issued against it and
failed to pay the advances on costs of the annulment proceedings, leading to its discontinuance; and (ii) the claimant
initiated a number of litigation and arbitration proceedings after the ICSID arbitration and did not comply with any of
its awards due to its financial situation; and (iii) the proceedings initiated by the claimant are funded by a third-party,
who will not comply with claimant’s obligations under a resulting costs award. However, the main reason for granting
the request was the respondent’s argument that ‘material risk that Claimant will be unable or unwilling to comply with
a costs award issued against it’. ibid. para. 29, p. 6. The majority of the tribunal also stated that ‘it is well settled that
provisional measures can be ordered to protect the integrity of the proceedings as a whole’ (emphasis added). ibid. para. 65, p.
15.

973 Perenco (n 734).

974 City Oriente Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), 1CSID Case No.
ARB/06/21, Decision on Revocation of Provisional Measures and Other Procedural Matters (13 May 2008).

474

ARTICLE 47

that the Ecuadorian public authorities deem appropriate. The Provisional Measures do
not interfere with the exercise of those powers. They only establish that, on a provisional
basis, while the impact of an enacted law is resolved, natural resources continue to be
exploited pursuant to a Contract granted at the time by Ecuadorian public authorities,

considering it then a valid and effective instrument to regulate its natural resources”

(emphasis added).
J. Non-surveillance or discontinuance of surveillance

Non-surveillance requests are not very common in ICSID arbitrations, but this cat-
egory includes: (a) requests to discontinue or refrain from surveillance; (b) the non-in-
terception of communication of any form between a party, its legal counsel and the wit-
nesses or any personnel involved in the arbitration. According to the Reviewed Docu-
ments, this category of PMs was requested eight times out of a total number of 483 PM
requests submitted to ICSID tribunals representing 1.66 per cent of the total requests,
but was fully granted two times only and partially granted one time with a success rate

of 37.5 per cent of the total requests made under this specific category.

In Cementownia v. Turkey,’ the claimant requested the tribunal ‘to order several pro-
visional measures in order to discontinue the alleged surveillance’, and the arbitral tri-
bunal ordered the respondent to respond with sufficient evidence and to ‘immediately
discontinue until further notice all forms of surveillance or interference of communications
directed at Cementownia and its legal counsels..°’’ Upon receipt of respondent’s reply that:
first, respondent’s legal counsel ‘have not received or used any intercepts or other sur-
veillance results from the Prosecutor’s Office in conjunction with this arbitration’ and
second, [e]-mails that are not related to the investigated crime or any other crime, e-
mails that are duplicative or irrelevant to the investigation are destroyed’, the tribunal
maintained its order as to the discontinuance of all forms of surveillance directed at the

claimant and their counsel.?”
K. Emergency temporary orders

Emergency temporary orders ((ETOs’), also known as temporary restraining orders,
include: (a) emergency interim restraining relief, (b) orders temporarily maintaining the
status quo or granting the PMs requested pending the decision of the tribunal on the
PMs. This category of PMs aims at striking a balance between: (i) the urgency of the

975 ibid. para. 90.

976 Cementownia ‘Nowa Huta’ §.A. v. Republic of Turkey, 1CSTD Case No. ARB(AF)/06/2, Award (17 September 2009).
977 ibid. Procedural Order No. 2 (14 March 2008) as cited in ibid. para. 39, p. 10.

978 ibid. Procedural Order No. 2 (14 March 2008) as cited in ibid. para. 44, pp. 12-13.

475

4.620

4.621

4.622


4.623

4.624

4.625

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

requested PM and the gravity of the other party’s action; and (ii) the established princi-
ple that ‘provisional measures are extraordinary measures which should not be granted
lightly’.?”

ETOs represent a new trend aimed at maintaining the status quo pending the tribu-
nal’s decision on the requested PMs.”*° According to the Reviewed Documents, this
category of PMs was requested 47 times out of a total number of 483 PM requests
submitted to ICSID tribunals representing 9.73 per cent of the total requests, but was
fully granted 20 times and partially granted one time with a success rate of 47 per cent
of the total requests made under this specific category.

In Burlington Resources v. Ecuador,”*'
with an ETO and the arbitral tribunal rejected the ETO twice before it granted the
same. [he tribunal, having been persuaded that the requirements of ‘urgency’ and ‘ne-

the claimant requested a number of PMs along

cessity’ were met, recommended that ‘the Respondents refrain from engaging in any
conduct that aggravates the dispute between the Parties and/or alters the status quo
until it decides on the Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures or it reconsiders the

present recommendation, whichever is first’.”*

In City Oriente v. Ecuador and Petroecuador,’®

the claimant requested a number of PMs
and the tribunal sent a ‘communication to the parties asking them ‘[to] refrain from en-
gaging in any conduct ... that may... affect or modify the legal situation existing as of
such date between the parties under the Contract dated March 29, 1995 ... particularly
in connection with the effectiveness or administrative termination of said Contract or
the enforced collection of any moneys’. The tribunal further requested both parties to
notify it if either intended to ‘take any measure that may violate’ the decision stipulated
in the communication.” As it stands, the tribunal’s communication can be character-
ized as an ETO. Subsequently, the tribunal expressly issued another ETO providing
that ‘the Tribunal hereby orders that, pending a ruling on the provisional measures re-
quested by City Oriente Limited, the Republic of Ecuador and (Petroecuador) refrain
from [...]’.”8° Both ETOs were issued by the arbitral tribunal at its own initiative since
claimant’s PM requests did not include an ETO request.

979 Maffezini (n 756) para. 10, p. 3.

980 In Teinver (n 757) and Award (21 July 2017), whilst claimant’s PM request for preservation of certain documents was
pending, the respondent amended those documents, thus rendering the PM request moot.

981 Burlington Resources (n 761).

982. ibid. para. 24, p. 9.

983 City Oriente (n 781).

984 ibid. para. 13.

985 ibid.

986 ibid. p.19.

476

ARTICLE 47

L. Reconsideration, revocation and/or modification of granted PMs

This category covers PM requests aimed at the revocation or the modification of the
already granted PMs. Such requests are examined under Article 47 and the tribunals’
power to re-examine if there is any change in the circumstances justifying the revoca-
tion or the modification of the granted PMs is derived from Rule 39(4) of the ICSID
Rules. This power remains unchanged under the newly proposed amendments to the

ICISD rules.??”

Contrary to all other PMs, this request, along with the request to post security for costs,
is commonly submitted by the respondent. According to the Reviewed Documents,
this category of PMs was requested 34 times out of a total number of 483 PM requests
submitted to ICSID tribunals representing 7 per cent of the total requests. However,
it was fully granted five times with a success rate of 14.71 per cent of the total requests

made under this specific category.

Normally, arbitral tribunals require change in circumstances that compelling warrant
reconsideration of the previously granted PMs. Absent such change in circumstances
and/or compelling reasons to reconsider the granted PMs, tribunals would be very re-

luctant to vary their decisions. In Nova Group v. Romania,”

the respondent requested
the reconsideration of the already granted PMs ordering the respondent to ‘withdraw
or (or otherwise suspend the operation of ) the transmission of the European arrest war-
rant [...] and associated request for extradition [...] and refrain from reissuing or trans-
mitting this or any other European Arrest Warrant or other request for extradition’.**
The tribunal rejected the request on the basis that ‘Romania does not suggest that any
circumstances have changed in the short time since the Tribunal’s issuance of the Deci-
sion, much less to such a degree as to demonstrate compelling new circumstances that
would undermine the fundamental basis of that Decision ... Rather, Romania’s appli-
cation is largely directed at persuading the Tribunal it was wrong in its prior assessment,
while articulating with more emphasis a few points that Romania presented before,
but could have developed further in its extensive written and oral pleadings. Neither

presents a compelling basis for a reconsideration request’.””°

Amongst the few cases where the tribunal reconsidered its decision regarding the

granted PMs, is the case of Burlington Resources v. Ecuador,””' where the parties agreed

987 ‘Proposals for Amendment of the ICSID Rules — Consolidated Draft Rules’ (n 729).

988 Nova Group Investments, B.V. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/16/19, Procedural Order No. 8 (18 April 2017).
989 ibid. para. 365(A), p. 137.

990 ibid. para. 32, p. 10.

991 Burlington Resources, Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador, ICSTD Case No. ARB/08/5, Award (2 June 2010).

477

4.626

4.627

4.628

4.629


4.630

4.631

4.632

4.633

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

that the PMs should be revoked after what the claimant called the expropriation of the
exploration areas subject of the PMs and what the respondent called the abandoning

the operation of the exploration areas.’””
M. Miscellaneous requests

This category covers PM requests that do not qualify or fall under any of the above-
mentioned categories. It includes requests in relation to both substantive and proce-
dural matters. According to the Reviewed Documents, 59 miscellaneous PMs were
requested out of a total number of 483 PM requests submitted to ICSID tribunals
representing 12.22 per cent of the total requests, but only nine were fully granted and
two partially granted with a success rate of 10.17 per cent of the total requests made
under this miscellaneous category.

For example, in the case of Abaclat v. Argentina,”*

the respondent requested two PMs,
namely: (a) scheduling an urgent hearing to examine two witnesses; and (b) the IC-
SID’s Secretary-General to issue a report on the method it applied to verify the au-
thenticity of the documentation submitted together with the request for arbitration.
The arbitral tribunal rejected both requests on the basis that: (a) the respondent failed
to prove the urgency as to their request of scheduling an urgent hearing; and (b) the
report related request falls outside the scope of the ICSID Secretary-General’s tasks

and outside the scope of PMs.””*

In Tanzania Electric v. IPTL,*” the respondent requested a number of PMs, including
the payment of sums due under the disputed contract and the execution of some obli-
gations under the contract. In rejecting the requests, the arbitral tribunal noted that ‘the
balance of convenience or [...] the balance of harm, can be a sufficient ground on its
own for granting this sort of relief — if the nature of the relief is beyond that contemplated
by Rule 39°

In Saipem v. Bangladesh,” the claimant requested the payment of the retention money,
which was already granted under a previous ICC award. The tribunal dismissed this
request as the urgency requirement was not satisfied. The tribunal stated that ‘[it] is nor

inclined to recommend measures guaranteeing an award in favour of Saipem.|...| this could

992 ibid. paras 77-79, pp. 17-18.

993 Abaclat (n 929).

994 ibid. paras 28-29, p. 7.

995 Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited v. Independent Power Tanzania Limited, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/8, Deci-
sion on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures (20 December 1999).

996 ibid. para. 17.

997 Saipem (n 778).

478

ARTICLE 47

be viewed as a de facto enforcement of part of the ICC Award.””* In the same case, the
claimant requested the return for the warranty bond for cancellation and the immediate
termination of the parallel national domestic litigation or, alternatively, the suspension
of the aforementioned litigation and avoid the encashment of this bond until the final
adjudication of the current ICSID arbitration. The tribunal struck a balance of interests
and granted this request and considered the requirements of ‘urgency’ and ‘necessity’ es-
tablished, noting that “Bangladesh does not contest Saipem’s contentions and that there

is a risk of irreparable harm if Saipem has to pay the amount of the Warranty Bond’.””

As evident from the above, the tribunal referred to ‘irreparable harm’, when, in fact, 4.634
the harm could, at best, be characterized as ‘significant harm’ that is capable of being
remedied by awarding damages. Also, the tribunal did not discuss the request to imme-

diately terminate the parallel domestic litigation not the alternative request to stay such
litigation until the end of the ICSID arbitration.

In Gabriel Resources v. Romania,’ the claimant requested a number of requests, 4.635
amongst which are: (i) the non-disclosure of documents produced during domestic
investigative proceedings and ensure that no information — that came to the knowledge
of the national bodies as a result of such investigation — becomes available to any per-
son having any role in respondent’s defence in this arbitration; and (ii) the respondent
not to proffer any evidence gained through the national bodies investigation without
prior identification to and leave from the Tribunal with an opportunity for claimants
to comment on any such request. The tribunal rejected both requests, stating that it has
evidence on record that no classified and confidential documents have been collected
and no evidence exists that privileged documents such as communications with counsel

have been illicitly obtained.

6. THE CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Since PMs normally require urgent and necessary intervention on matters that can- 4.636
not await the rendering of a final award, certain circumstances and conditions must

be fulfilled to grant PMs. Whilst there may not be total consensus on the conditions

998 ibid. para. 185, p. 49.

999 ibid. para. 182, p. 48. The tribunal also noted ‘at the hearing Saipem convincingly showed that there is a risk that it may
be required to pay to the Italian bank the amount that the Bangladeshi bank may have to pay to Petrobangla’. ibid. para.
181, p. 48.

1000 Gabriel Resources Ltd. and Gabriel Resources (Jersey) Ltd. v. Romania, CSTD Case No. ARB/15/31, Decision on Claim-
ants’ Second Request for Provisional Measures (22 November 2016).

479

4.637

4.638

4.639

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

that must be fulfilled to grant PMs,'°' practice has shown that ICSID tribunals usu-
ally grant PMs if the requested PMs are: (1) urgent; (2) necessary; (3) intended to avert
significant/irreparable harm;'” and (4) proportionate (i.e. non-abusive). This is further
detailed below.

At the outset and on the specific issue of burden of proof, it is for the applicant/request-
ing party to demonstrate and evidence the fulfilment of the conditions required for
1003

granting PMs.

In Rizzani and others v. Kuwait,’ the arbitral tribunal afirmed that ‘an order of pro-
visional measures will only be granted if the measure sought is necessary to preserve a
party’s rights and where the need is urgently required to avoid serious or irreparable
harm’. However, it should be noted that the dividing line between the three require-
ments is not always clear-cut: sometimes tribunals examine ‘urgency’ and ‘necessity’

1005 1006

together,’ other times they examine ‘necessity’ and ‘irreparable harm’ together,

1007

or

‘urgency and ‘irreparable harm together.
A. Urgency

In their awards, ICSID tribunals have shed some light on the notion of ‘urgency’. The
degree of urgency required to grant PMs is not specified in Article 47 of the Conven-
tion nor in Article 39 of the ICSID Rules. However, there are three main views in this

regard, namely: (i) PMs should be granted only in cases of ‘absolute necessity’; (ii) PMs

1001 Arbitral tribunals are not unanimous as to the conditions for granting PMs. Whilst the most established requirement is
‘urgency’, arbitral tribunals have adopted divergent views regarding other conditions. For example, regarding ‘necessity’,
this is sometimes discussed independently and other times addressed under ‘urgency’, ‘irreparable harm’, or ignored
altogether. See Rizzani (n 764).

1002 Recently, some ICSID tribunals have lowered the threshold of ‘irreparable harm by accepting that ‘significant harm’
suffices for the purpose of assessing the award of PMs. See, e.g., Hydro S.r.1. and others v. Republic of Albania ICSID
Case No. ARB/15/28) and Nova Group Investments, B.V. v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/19). It is also worth
mentioning that the proposed 2018 amendments to the ICSID rules of arbitration refer to the existence of ‘current or
imminent harm to the other party’ as stated herein.

1003 Schreuer and others (n 3) 778-79.

1004 Rizzani (n 764) para. 101, p. 46. See also Occidental Petroleum (n 745) para. 59, p.27.

1005 Railroad Development (n 738) para. 34, p. 16.

1006 Burlington Resources (n 761) para. 51, p. 17.

1007 Rizzani (n 764) para. 101 p. 46. In Occidental v. Ecuador the tribunal noted that ‘[I]n order for an international tribunal
to grant PMs, there must exist both a right to be preserved, circumstances of necessity and urgency to avoid irreparable
harm’. See Occidental Petroleum (n 745) para. 61, p. 28. Similarly, in Border Timbers and others v. Zimbabwe, the tribunal
noted that ‘provisional measures should only be granted where they are necessary to preserve a party's rights and urgent
in order to avoid irreparable harn’. Border Timbers Limited, Timber Products International (Private) Limited, and Hanga-
ni Development Co. (Private) Limited v. Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25, Procedural Order No. 5 (3
April 2016) para. 55, p. 16. Also, in Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine the arbitral tribunal was of the view that ‘the international
jurisprudence on provisional measures indicates that a provisional measure is necessary where the actions of a party “are

capable of causing or of threatening irreparable prejudice to the rights invoked”. Tokios Tokelés (n 844) para. 8, p.5.

480

ARTICLE 47

should be granted when ‘reasonableness’ so warrants; and (iii) PMs are assessed and

granted on the basis of ICJ jurisprudence.'°”

In Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, the arbitral tribunal held that ‘the degree of “urgency”
which is required depends on the circumstances, including the requested provisional
measures, and may be satisfied where a party can prove that there is a need to ob-
tain the requested measures at a certain point in the procedure before the issuance

of an award’.

When discussing the same issue, and after quoting the tribunal of
Biwater,'*" the tribunal noted that the requirement of ‘urgency’ is closely related to the
‘non-aggravation of the dispute’ stating that ‘Indeed, when the measures are intended
to protect against the aggravation of the dispute during the proceedings, the urgency
requirement is fulfilled by definition’.’°" The tribunal of Biwarer also added that the

level of urgency required depends on the type of measure requested.'°”

In Border Timbers and others v. Zimbabwe, the arbitral tribunal relied on an ICJ
precedent, '°"
‘action prejudicial to the rights of either party is likely to be taken before such final decision ts

given.

where ‘the ICJ unanimously determined that a measure is urgent when

In Hydro and others v. Albania,’ the arbitral tribunal referred to the claimants citation
of Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, and Quiborax and Non-Metallic v. Bolivia, in relation to
the definition of urgency and concluded that: [it] accepts that the extradition proceed-
ings may take some time, perhaps weeks or even months. However, if the [.. .] authori-
ties decide to extradite, it would take some time for the Claimants to seek further orders
from this Tribunal and extradition may be an accomplished fact by the time an order is
made. The Tribunal therefore considers that there is an imminent risk to the Claimants’

ability to effectively participate in this arbitration’.'°'°

1008 Burlington Resources (n 761). See also Teinver (n 757), para. 233 and Border Timbers (n 1007).

1009 Biwater Gauff(n 780) para. 76, p. 23.

1010 Burlington Resources (n 761).

1011 ibid. para. 74, p. 24. See also Perenco v. Ecuador, where the arbitral tribunal held that ‘Provisional measures may only
be granted where they are urgent, [...] Provisional measures will be granted if necessary, at the time of the decision, to
pteserve the effectiveness and integrity of the proceedings and avoid severe aggravation of the dispute’. Perenco (n 734)
para. 43, p. 18.

1012 Biwater Gauff(n 780) para. 76, p. 23.

1013 Border Timbers (n 1007) para. 57, p. 16.

1014 Case Concerning Passage Through the Great Belt (Finland v. Denmark), Request for the Indication of Provisional Meas-
ures dated 29 July 1991) para. 23 as cited by Tokios Tokelés (n 844) para. 8, p. 5.

1015 Hydro S.r.1. and others v. Republic of Albania, CSTD Case No. ARB/15/28, Order on Provisional Measures (3 March
2016).

1016 ibid. para. 3.29, p. 22.

481

4.640

4.641

4.642


4.643

4.644

4.645

4.646

4.647

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

In City Oriente v. Ecuador and Petroecuador, the arbitral tribunal recognized that ‘Nei-
ther the Convention nor the Rules make express reference to the urgency requirement’,
yet it ‘seems evident that provisional measures are only appropriate if it is impossible to

wait for a specific issue to be settled at the merits stage’.!°"”

In Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, the arbitral tribunal was of the view that ‘[t]he circum-
stances under which provisional measures are required under Article 47 are those in
which the measures are necessary to preserve a party’s rights and that need is urgent’.
The tribunal elaborated that ‘A measure is urgent where “action prejudicial to the rights

of either party is likely to be taken before such final decision is taken”.'°"

On the other hand, in Railroad Development v. Guatemala, the arbitral tribunal noted
that ‘the standard to be applied is one of reasonableness, after consideration of all the
circumstances of the request and after taking into account the rights to be protect-
ed and their susceptibility to irreversible damage should the tribunal fail to issue a

recommendation ’.!°!’

While there is no uniform definition for ‘urgency’, it is indeed submitted, as expressed
in Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania," that ‘the degree of “urgency” required to grant provi-
sional measures is dependent on a number of factors, including: (i) the gravity of action/
event the PM is supposed to counter; (ii) the relevance and the type of right the PM
is meant to protect; (iii) the conduct of both parties (e.g. hostile or cooperative). For
example, if the action or even the PM it is supposed to counter is so grave that it will
affect a party’s right to present their case or obtain an enforceable award, a PM request
is urgent by definition. Given the explicit reference to the requirement of urgency in the

1021

newly proposed amendments to ICSID Rules,"”* one can expect significant develop-

ments in the jurisprudence towards a more uniform criterion.
B. Necessity

As stated herein above, necessity, as a condition to granting PMs, is usually consid-
ered in the context of other conditions. Many arbitral tribunals discussing necessity

1017 City Oriente (n 781) para. 67.

1018 Tokios Tokelés (n 844) para. 8, p. 5. See also Occidental v. Ecuador Occidental v. Ecuador where the tribunal held that ‘A
measure is urgent where “action prejudicial to the rights of either party is likely to be taken before such final decision is
given”. Occidental Petroleum (n 745) para. 59, p. 27.

1019 Railroad Development (n 738) para. 34, p. 17.

1020 Biwater Gauff(n 780).

1021 ‘Proposals for Amendment of the ICSID Rules — Consolidated Draft Rules’ (n 729).

482

ARTICLE 47

have adopted the criterion of ‘irreparable harm’ as settled by the ICJ.'°” For example,
in Border Timbers and Others v. Zimbabwe,” the arbitral tribunal referred to an ICJ
precedent'™* where President Jiménez de Aréchaga in a separate opinion opined that
‘a provisional measure is necessary when the actions of a party are capable of causing
or of threatening irreparable prejudice to the rights invoked’. However, some arbitral
tribunals have adopted different criteria as detailed below.

In Perenco v. Ecuador,”

the arbitral tribunal was of the opinion that provisional meas-
ures ‘must be necessary, because that is what “require” means, and measures will be not
necessary where a party can be adequately compensated by an award of damages if it
successfully vindicates its rights when the case is finally decided. Thus, as the Respond-
ents correctly submit, many of the authorities express the test in terms of “irreparable
loss”. Where action by one party may cause loss to the other which may not be capable
of being made good by an eventual award of damages, the test in the Article is likely to
be met. But the Article does not lay down a test of irreparable loss and the authorities

do not warrant so narrow a construction .!°*°

Some tribunals adopt a lower threshold of necessity. For example, in Biwater Gauff

v. Tanzania,’

the claimant argued that ‘it has been denied access to key evidence
relevant to its claims for damages: the administrative, financial, legal, commercial and
engineering records contained in the offices of its investment’s vehicle, City Water. If
BGT’s right to the preservation and production of evidence is not protected, so it is
argued, this will have a direct impact on BGT’ ability to pursue its claims for damages in this
arbitration and the Arbitral Tribunal’ ability to decide such claims fairly. This is not harm of
a type which can be compensated by damages, for the very reason that it goes to BGT’s abil-
ity to effectively present its claim for damages’.'* In granting the request, the tribunal
considered the requirement of necessity satisfied, as ‘there is a need for such evidence
to be preserved before the proceedings progress any further (e.g. to enable each party

properly to plead their respective cases)’.!°”

1022 See Border Timbers Limited (n 1007) para. 58, p.17; RSM (n 760) para. 58, p. 13; Rizzani (n 764), para. 144, p. 62; Case
Concerning Passage Through the Great Belt (n 1014) para. 23 as cited by Tokios Tokelés (n 844) para. 8, p.5 and Aegean
Sea Continental Shelf Case (Greece v. Turkey), Request for the Indication of Interim Measures of Protection, Order (11
September 1976), Separate Opinion of President Jiménez de Aréchaga, 1976 ICJ Rep 3 at 11 as cited by Occidental
Petroleum (n 745) para. 59, p. 27.

1023 Border Timbers (n 1007) para. 58, p. 17.

1024 Aegean Sea Continental Shelf Case (n 1022) as cited by Occidental Petroleum (n 745) para. 59, p. 27.

1025 See Perenco (n 734).

1026 ibid. para. 43, p. 18.

1027 Biwater Gauff (n 780).

1028 ibid. para. 45, pp. 15-16.

1029 ibid. para. 86, p. 25.

483

4.648

4.649


4.650

4.651

4.652

4.653

4.654

4.655

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

It should be noted that the reference to ‘current or imminent harm’ rather than ‘irrepa-
rable harm’, in the newly proposed amendments to the rules, will likely play a role in
lowering the threshold and streamlining the practice regarding the ‘urgency’ and ‘neces-

sity requirements.
C. Irreparable and/or significant harm

Neither Article 47 nor Rule 39 provide for any express reference to the conditions for
PMs, including, but not limited to, the threshold of ‘irreparable’ or ‘significant’ harm.
However, traditionally, ICSID arbitral tribunals followed the ICJ in upholding the re-
quirement of ‘irreparable harm’ as a condition to granting PMs, and this is usually ap-
plied as either a stand-alone condition or a requisite crizerion for assessment of ‘urgency’
and/or ‘necessity’. Nevertheless, some arbitral tribunals opted for the less stringent no-
tion of ‘significant harm’.

With respect to ‘irreparable harm’, such condition used to be applied stringently to the
extent that harm, which the PM is intended to avoid, ought to be irreversible and ir-
reparable through monetary relief. However, as a proactive transition towards ‘significant
(rather than irreparable) harm’, arbitral tribunals have introduced the notions of ‘rea-
sonableness’, ‘proportionality’ and/or ‘balance of convenience’ to assess ‘irreparable harm’.

In Railroad Development Corporation v. Guatemala,”

the arbitral tribunal analysed the
circumstances of the case to determine whether the requested measures were justified
in terms of necessity and urgency and held that ‘Since no qualifications to the powers
of an ICSID Tribunal to recommend PMs found their way in the text of the ICSID
Convention, the standard to be applied is one of reasonableness, after consideration of all
the circumstances of the request and after taking into account the rights to be protected
and their susceptibility to irreversible damage should the tribunal fail to issue a recom-

mendation’' (emphasis added).

Similarly, in Rizzani and others v. Kuwait,'°” the arbitral tribunal held that ‘an order of
provisional measures will only be granted if the measure sought is necessary to preserve a

party’s rights and where the need is urgently required to avoid serious or irreparable harm’.

In Quiborax and Non-Metallic v. Bolivia,"* the arbitral tribunal actually applied the ‘sig-
nificant harm criterion with clear references to ‘proportionality’ (i.e. the harm suffered by

1030 Aegean Sea Continental Shelf Case (n 1022) as cited by Occidental Petroleum (n 745) para. 59, p. 27.
1031 See Railroad (n 738) para. 34.

1032 Rizzani (n 764).

1033 Quiborax (n 762).

484

ARTICLE 47

the requesting party outweighs the harm that is likely to result to the party against whom
the PM is directed) and the ‘balance of competing harms’. In this regard, the tribunal
stated “The Tribunal considers that an irreparable harm is a harm that cannot be repaired
by an award of damages. Such a standard has been adopted by several ICSID tribunals
and embodied in Art. 17A of the UNCITRAL Model Law. That provision requires the
party requesting an interim measure to satisfy the tribunal that: Harm not adequately re-
paired by an award of damages is likely to result if the measure is not ordered, and such harm
substantially outweighs the harm that is likely to result to the party against whom the
measure is directed if the measure is granted [. ..] Tribunal must thus da/ance the harm
caused to Claimants by the criminal proceedings and the harm that would be caused to

Respondent if the proceedings were stayed or terminated’!°™ (emphasis added).

In Plama v. Bulgaria it was asserted that the need for PMs must be urgent and neces-
sary to preserve the s¢azus quo or to avoid irreparable harm to the rights of a party.'°* As
such, the need to grant a measure is assessed on a “balance of convenience’ basis as the
tribunal usually balances the degree of ‘irreparable harm’ suffered by the applicant if the

requested measure was not granted.'°%°

Concerning ‘significant harm’, the first arbitral tribunal in an international law context
to adopt this notion was the ad oc tribunal of Paushok v. Mongolia,'°*’ which applied
the UNICTRAL arbitration rules. Subsequently, said notion was adopted by ICSID

tribunals.

In City Oriente v. Ecuador and Petroecuador,'** the arbitral tribunal denied the existence
of the requirement to ‘prevent an irreparable harm’, asserting that the ‘only requirement
arising from the wording of Rule 39 is the traditional urgency requirement’.’””’ The
tribunal affirmed that Rule 39 only refers to ‘circumstances that require such measures’
and explained that ‘/i/¢ is not so essential that provisional measures be necessary /0 pre-
vent irreparable harm, but that the arm spared the petitioner by such measures must be
significant and that it exceeds greatly the damage caused to the party affected thereby |. . .]
there are variations in approach or the precise wording used by the ICSID tribunals as
to whether the requirement is that of “irreparable harm”, or whether a demonstration
of “serious” harm will suffice. Regardless of what the exact terminology should be, the
Tribunal agrees with the reasoning of the tribunal in PNG v Papua New Guinea that the

1034 ibid. para. 158, p. 43.

1035 See Plama (n 803) 553, para. 38.

1036 See Kaufmann-Kohler and Antonietti (n 757) 539.

1037 Sergei Paushok, C{SC Golden East Company and C]SCVostokneftegaz Company v. ‘The Government of Mongolia, ad hoc
arbitration under the rules of UNICTRAL as cited in Plama (n 803).

1038 City Oriente (n 974) para. 70.

1039 ibid.

485

4.656

4.657

4.658


4.659

4.660

4.661

4.662

4.663

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

term “irreparable” harm must be understood as requiring a material risk of “serious or grave
damage” to the requesting party, and not harm that is literally “irreparable”. The degree of
“seriousness” or “gravity” required wi// necessarily vary from case to case, depending on the

circumstances of each case and the nature of the relief requested’ (emphasis added).

In Burlington Resources v. Ecuador,’ the arbitral tribunal affirmed that ‘the risk of
harm must be assessed with respect to the rights of both parties’, and it also quoted
the tribunal in the City Orient Case when it established that ‘[I]t is nor so essential that
provisional measures be necessary to prevent irreparable harm, but that the arm spared
the petitioner by such measures must be significant and that it exceeds greatly the damage
caused to the party affected thereby’.'°”

Thus, the traditional condition of ‘irreparable harm’ has been gradually subjected to the
criteria of ‘proportionality’, ‘reasonableness’ and/or “balance of convenience’ and then
transformed into ‘significant harm’, in the absence of clear and express criteria under
Articles 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID Rules.

D. Proportionality

In recent cases, ‘proportionality’ has appeared amongst the conditions for PMs, mainly
in relation to the notion of ‘irreparable harm’ as detailed herein above. However, the

jurisprudence in this context remains to be developed.

In Nova Group v. Romania,'* the arbitral tribunal agreed with the parties that it should
grant PMs only when such measures are ‘(a) necessary to preserve rights, (b) urgently
required, and (c) the particular measures requested are proportionate, in the sense that
they do not impose such undue burdens on the other party as to outweigh, in a balance
of equities, the justification for granting them [...] any assessment of a request for
provisional measures would need to consider if the particular measures requested are
proportionate, in the sense that the applicant's need for them is not overweighed by the hard-
ships to which the other party would be subjected to if the measures are granted.“

Similarly, in Hydro and others v. Albania,’ the tribunal stated that ‘In granting provi-

sional measures, the Tribunal must consider the proportionality of the provisional measures

1040 ibid. para. 72.

1041 Burlington Resources (n 761) para. 81, p. 25.
1042 ibid. para. 81, p. 26.

1043 Nova Group (n 781).

1044 ibid. para. 237, p. 76.

1045 Aydro S.r.2. (n 1015).

486

ARTICLE 47

requested. Specifically, the Tribunal must da/ance the harm caused to the Claimants by
the criminal proceedings and the harm that would be caused to the Respondent if those

proceedings were stayed’.'°"

Accordingly, ‘proportionality’ manifested itself as a balancing factor, where the test is 4.664
simply one of balancing harms and interests to ensure that the requesting party’s harm
unequivocally outweighs any harm or prejudice suffered by the party against whom the
measure is taken. In essence, this implies aversion of ‘abuse of right’ in the context of

PMs.

E. No prejudgment of the merits

Since Article 47 of the ICSID Convention deals with PMs, it is not expected or envis- 4.665
aged that arbitral tribunals will decide on issues pertaining to the merits of the dis-
pute. Arbitral tribunals considering PMs remain focused on the requested PMs which
should not impact or cause any prejudgment of the merits of the dispute. This goes to

the very essence of PMs and their temporary non-final nature.

In Saipem v. Bangladesh, the claimant requested the payment of the retention money 4.666
which was already granted under a previous ICC award. The arbitral tribunal dismissed

this request on the basis that the urgency condition was not met and also stated that ‘the
Tribunal is not inclined to recommend measures guaranteeing an award in favour of Saipem.
Indeed, as correctly put by Bangladesh, this could be viewed as a de facto enforcement of

part of the ICC Award" (emphasis added).

Also, in Helnan International v. Egypt,’ the claimant requested a number of PMs that 4.667
involved substantive issues pertaining to the merits of the dispute, and so the arbitral
tribunal rejected the requested PMs and stated that ‘the Provisional Measure requested
by Helnan and the final relief it seeks, if not strictly identical, are the same to a large ex-
tent”

Gauff v. Tanzania,” the arbitral tribunal asserted that ‘the Tribunal has to strike a

and so this would be tantamount to prejudging the merits. Similarly, in Biwater

careful balance between the urgency of a request for provisional measures and the need

not to prejudge merits of the case’'°”' (emphasis added).

1046 ibid. para. 3.37, p. 24.

1047 Saipem (n 778) para. 185, p. 49.
1048 Helnan (n 911).

1049 ibid. para. 32, p. 9.

1050 Biwater Gauff(n 780).

1051 ibid. para. 67, pp. 20-21.

487

4.668

4.669

4.670

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

By and large and in specific reference to the above five connected conditions, it is im-
portant to note that each party to any PM applications should be afforded a reasonable
Opportunity to present its observations in relation to the requested PMs. Whilst this is
not expressly mentioned in Article 47, it is enshrined in ICSID Rule 39(4) and remains
essential to the safeguarding of the requirements of due process. However, it should be
noted that it suffices to afford the parties an opportunity to submit their observations,
irrespective of whether the parties have actually availed themselves of such afforded

opportunity.

7. CONCLUDING REMARKS: THE PAST PRESENT AND FUTURE OF PMS

Evidently, Article 47 is broadly worded to achieve a balance between the competing in-
terests of States and investors. This is neither surprising nor unintended, since PMs are
in a constant state of flux and so arbitral tribunals are expected to develop harmonious
jurisprudence on the conditions, rights and types of PMs. This entails affording tribu-
nals the power and authority to develop this area of law with sufficient certainty subject
to general guiding parameters rather than engage in an impossible task of amending
the ICSID Convention every now and then. Thus, the ICSID Rules are of great im-
portance in this regard, since they can offer the needed guidance in relation to PMs
and their parameters. Given the established practices concerning PMs and the wealth
of decisions dealing with PMs, time has come to consider certain express uniform rules
on the conditions of PMs, their categories and the related rights worthy of protection.
It is in such spirit that the 2018 newly proposed amendments to the ICSID Rules offer

1053

enlightening guidance on PMs.

On the specificity of Article 47, the legislative history of the provision shows that dis-
cussions took place as to the ICSID tribunals’ powers to award damages to the ag-
grieved party as a consequence of non-compliance with the ordered/recommended
PMs.'°4 However, the reference to damages was rejected and not included in the Con-
vention or the Rules.'°* Thus, whilst tribunals repeatedly stated that non-compliance
with an arbitral tribunal’s PM recommendation would be taken into account when

1052 City Oriente (n 781).

1053 ‘Proposals for Amendment of the ICSID Rules — Consolidated Draft Rules’ (n 729).

1054 See Schreuer and others (n 3) 764.

1055 Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals 8.A. and Allan Fosk Kaphin. v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, |CSTD Case No.
ARB/06/2, Award (16 September 2015) para. 546, p. 180 citing Aron Broches, Chairman of the Legal Committee,
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States: Documents
Concerning the Origin and the Formulation of the Convention, Vol. II, Part 2, International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ed.), 1968.

488

ARTICLE 47

rendering the final award," tribunals were reluctant to take actions or grant damages

against recalcitrant parties.'°°’

Having considered no less than 120 ICSID decisions, 540 provisional measures ap-
plications and 400 related documents, it is abundantly clear that there is no exhaustive
list of protected rights or the types of PMs that could be granted. Arbitral tribunals
and parties contributed to developing PM conditions, types and rights. Throughout
this commentary, the author has identified 13 categories of PMs,'°* 9 categories of

protected rights’?

and intertwined conditions for granting PMs.

However, it is submitted that more certainty, clarity and predictability as to the condi-
tions of PMs are needed in light of the overlap between urgency, necessity, significant
harm, proportionality and no prejudgment of the merits. Arbitral tribunals should also be
more cautious and detailed in examining and deciding on PMs, to enable the parties to

carefully understand the basis according to which the PMs are granted or denied.

It has been seen that whilst there is no uniform definition for ‘urgency’, ‘the degree of
“urgency” required to grant provisional measures is dependent on a number of fac-
tors, including: (i) the gravity of action/event the PM is supposed to counter; (ii) the
relevance and the type of right the PM is meant to protect; (iii) the conduct of both
parties (e.g. Aostile or cooperative).'° By way of illustration, if the event which the PM is
supposed to counter is so grave that it will affect a party’s right to present their case or
obtain an enforceable award, a PM request is urgent by definition.

1056 See Schreuer and others (n 3) 759.

1057In Quiborax (n 1055) the respondent did not comply with the tribunal’s recommendation to stay the criminal pro-
ceedings against the claimant for the period of the arbitration. Accordingly, the claimant ‘request[ed] and called for
the Tribunal to declare that the Respondent’s conduct in this arbitration “constitute[s] breaches of the Respondent’s
obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment, not take arbitrary or discriminatory measures, and its general duty
to arbitrate fairly and in good faith” (ibid. para. 531, p. 175). The tribunal agreed with the claimant that ‘by failing to
comply with those provisional measures, the Respondent has breached Article 47 of the ICSID Convention (ibid. para.
582, p. 193). However, the tribunal held that it ‘does not find that the Respondent’s failure to comply with the Decision
on Provisional Measures amounts to a breach of its duty to arbitrate in good faith’ (ibid. para. 583, p. 193).

1058 These categories as discussed above are: (i) the right of the preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation of the dis-
pute; (ii) the right to maintaining the procedural integrity of ICSID proceedings; (iii) the right of exclusive jurisdiction;
(iv) the right to immunity; (v) the preservation and production of documents; (vi) the right to specific performance;
(vii) the right to having the ICSID arbitration conducted in good faith; (viii) the right to confidentiality of the proceed-
ings; and (ix) the right to an enforceable award.

1059 These categories as discussed above are: (i) maintenance or restoration of the status quo; (ii) non-aggravation of the
dispute; (iii) confidentiality of the ICSID proceedings; (iv) preservation and production of evidence/documents; (v)
stay of parallel domestic and arbitral proceedings; (vi) stay of pending ICSID proceedings; (vii) protection orders; (viii)
pte-award security/financial guarantee; (ix) non-enforcement ofa legislative act; (x) non-surveillance or discontinuance
of surveillance; (xi) emergency temporary orders; (xii) reconsideration, revocation and/or modification of granted PMs;
and (xiii) miscellaneous requests.

1060 Biwater Gauff(n 780).

489

4.671

4.672

4.673


4.674

4.675

4.676

4.677

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

Given the explicit reference to the requirement of urgency in the newly proposed
amendments to ICSID Rules,’ one can expect significant developments in the juris-
prudence towards a more uniform criterion. It should also be noted that the reference
to ‘current or imminent harm’ rather than ‘irreparable harm’, in the newly proposed
amendments to the rules, will likely play a role in lowering the threshold and streamlin-

ing the practice regarding the ‘urgency’ and ‘necessity’ requirements.

As things stand at present, PMs are not self-executing and are usually issued in the
form of procedural orders (not awards), so they do not enjoy a res judicata effect and
are not final. Even though such PMs are not final, ICSID tribunals have developed
a practice giving PMs a binding effect on the parties since Maffezini v. Spain." In
City Oriente v. Ecuador and Petroecuador, the tribunal affirmed that ‘a failure to comply
with orders given to Respondents by the Tribunal in accordance with Article 47 of
the Convention will entail a violation of Article 26 thereof, and engage Respondents’
liability’.1°° Similarly, in Quiborax and Non-Metallic v. Bolivia, the tribunal held that
‘the ordinary meaning of this provision [Article 47], especially the terms “recommend”
and “should be taken” do not convey the notion of a binding order .. . Similarly, the
travaux préparatoires of the ICSID Convention, to the extent relevant as supplemen-
tary means of interpretation, show that an earlier draft using the word “prescribe” was
then changed to “recommend”’.'° However, the tribunal asserted the binding nature of
PMs based on ‘consistent line of cases and the evolution of international law evidenced
in ICJ and ECtHR jurisprudence’ and the ICSID tribunals as well.’

Moreover, it is submitted that PMs can indeed be considered and granted in annulment
and other ICSID proceedings, if the circumstances so warrant, and it is expected that the
categories of PMs will increase and evolve to include new forms. That said, and in light of
the dynamic nature of PMs, arbitral tribunals have developed the category of ‘ETOs’, thus

creating an exception to the condition that parties must be heard first before granting PMs.

Furthermore, it has been seen that the arbitral tribunal of RMS v. Saint Lucia, grant-
ed security for costs (based on a party’s request), thus, introducing a new type of PMs to
the ICSID jurisprudence where a hypothetical/contingent right (e.g. the right to future

award) may exceptionally merit protection by means of PMs. This decision paved the

1061 ‘Proposals for Amendment of the ICSID Rules — Consolidated Draft Rules’ (n 729).

1062 Maffezini (n 756); Schreuer and others (n 3) 759.

1063 City Oriente (n 781) para. 53.

1064 Quiborax (n 1055) para. 578, p. 191.

1065 ibid. where the tribunal expressly stated “Despite this, ICSID tribunals have consistently found that they have the pow-
et to make binding orders for provisional measures. The rationale is that these decisions derive their mandatory force
from the function of provisional remedies, which is to secure the applicant’s rights while the proceedings are pending’.

1066 RSM (n 760).

490

ARTICLE 47

way for other ICSID tribunals to grant security for costs. It is this novel and in-depth
consideration of the issues of security for costs and third-party funding (newly labelled
as ‘arbitration finance’) in RSM v. Saint Lucia’ that must have played considerable role
in introducing separate and stand-alone provisions on security for costs and disclosure
of third party funding in the 2018 newly proposed amendments to the ICSID Rules.!°*

Under the specific category of ‘Stay of pending ICSID Proceedings’, it has been noted
that PM requests under this category have not been successful, yet it is worth noting
that the 2018 newly proposed amendments to the ICSID rules allow such measure to
be granted in case of failure to post the ordered security.'°” So, it will be interesting to
see how and when arbitral tribunals may suspend pending ICSID proceedings for fail-

ure to provide security for costs.

On a different note and in the specific context of ‘attribution’, law and practice have

shown that the conduct of a State organ (whether executive, legislative or judicial) could

1067 ibid.

1068 The newly proposed Rule 51 on ‘Security for Costs’ states: ‘(1) A party may request that the Tribunal order the other
party to provide security for the costs of the proceeding and determine the appropriate terms for provision of the
security. (2) The following procedure shall apply: (a) the request shall specify the circumstances that require security
for costs; (b) the Tribunal shall fix time limits for written or oral submissions, as required, on the request; (c) if a party
requests security for costs before the constitution of the Tribunal, the Secretary-General shall fix time limits for written
submissions on the request, so that the Tribunal may consider the request promptly upon its constitution; and (d) the
Tribunal shall issue its decision on the request within 30 days after the latest of: (i) the constitution of the Tribunal, (ii)
the last written submission on the request; or (iii) the last oral submission on the request. (3) In determining whether
to order a party to provide security for costs, the Tribunal shall consider the party’s ability to comply with an adverse
decision on costs and any other relevant circumstances. (4) Ifa party fails to comply with an order for security for costs,
the Tribunal may suspend the proceeding until the security is provided. If the proceeding is suspended for more than 90
days, the Tribunal may, after consulting with the parties, order the discontinuance of the proceeding. (5) A party must
promptly disclose any material change in the circumstances upon which the Tribunal ordered security for costs. (6) The
Tribunal may at any time modify or revoke its order for security for costs, on its own initiative or upon a party’s request.’

The newly proposed Rule 21 on ‘Disclosure of Third-party Funding’ states: ‘(1) “Third-party funding” is the provi-
sion of funds or other material support for the pursuit or defense of a proceeding, by a natural or juridical person that is
not a party to the dispute (“third-party funder”), to a party to the proceeding, an affiliate of that party, or a law firm rep-
resenting that party. Such funds or material support may be provided: (a) through a donation or grant; or (b) in return
for a premium or in exchange for remuneration or reimbursement wholly or partially dependent on the outcome of the
proceeding. (2) A party shall file a written notice disclosing that it has third-party funding and the name of the third-
party funder. Such notice shall be sent to the Secretariat immediately upon registration of the Request for arbitration, or
upon concluding a third-party funding arrangement after registration. (3) Each party shall have a continuing obligation
to disclose any changes to the information referred to in paragraph (2) occurring after the initial disclosure, includ-
ing termination of the funding arrangement.’ For a detailed analysis of the issues of third party funding and security
for costs, including in investment arbitration, see the [CCA-Queen Mary Task Force Report on Third-Party Funding in
International Arbitration, ICCA Reports No.4 (2018) <https://www.arbitration-icca.org/media/10/40280243154551/
icca_reports_4_tpf_final_for_print_5_april.pdf> (accessed 30 August 2018).

1069 The rule in the 2018 proposed amendments reads as follows ‘Security for Costs (...) (4) Ifa party fails to comply with
an order for security for costs, the Tribunal may suspend the proceeding until the security is provided. If the proceeding
is suspended for more than 90 days, the Tribunal may, after consulting with the parties, order the discontinuance of the

proceeding’ (emphasis added).

491

4.678

4.679


4.680

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

be attributable to the State under certain circumstances.'°” Thus, a State, which is usu-
ally represented by its executive organ in an ICSID arbitration, might have PMs rec-
ommended against acts or omissions of other organs, including judicial authorities, as
in the case of CSOB v. Slovakia.”

In light of the Reviewed Documents, the author finds it useful to provide herein be-
low some statistics pertinent to ICSID PMs, namely: (i) a statistical chart of PMs in
ICSID cases (Figure 1); (ii) a statistical chart capturing the success rate of the diverse
categories of PMs (Figure 2);'°” and (iii) a statistical chart showing the most relevant

sectors for PM applications (Figure 3).

4.97%

7.03%

21.74%

5.38% 0.62%

Maintenance or restoration of the status quo
Il Non-aggravation of the dispute
Confidentiality of the ICSID proceedings
:+ Preservation and production of evidence/documents
Stay of parallel domestic and arbitral proceedings
= Stay of pending ICSID proceedings
§§ Protection orders
1! Pre-award security/ financial guarantee
M Non-enforcement of a legislative act
FF Non-surveillance or discontinuance of surveillance
Mi Emergency temporary orders
@ Reconsideration, revocation and/or modification of granted PMs

BI Miscellaneous requests

Figure 4.1 Statistical overview of PMs in ICSID cases

1070 International Law Commission's Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, With
Commentaries [2001], Yearbook of the International Law Commission, Vol. I, Part 2 <http://legal.un.org/ile/texts/
instruments/english/commentaries/9_6_2001.pdf> (accessed 27 August 2018).

1071 See Ceskoslovensko Obchodni Banka AS v. The Republic of Slovakia (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4); and Schreuer and oth-
ers (n 3) 797.

1072 Figures 4.1 and 4.2 reflect the percentages detailed throughout this commentary when analysing the different types/
categories of PMs.

1073 As per Figure 4.3, the sector in which the highest number of PM requests have been made is the ‘Oil, Gas & Mining’
sector, with 168 PM requests in 37 cases mostly involving Latin American States. These PM requests were mostly:

(i) stay of parallel domestic proceedings, (ii) non-enforcement of a legislative act, (iii) non-pecuniary PMs including

492

ARTICLE 47

50%

37.50%

40% 260

34.62%

30% 26% 26.67%

20%

14.71%
10.17%

11.90%
10%

0%

Oil & Gas Mining i Gaming Industry
[| Electric Power & Other Energy g_ Water, Sanitation & Flood Protection
Finance i Metal Industry
+ Information & Communication -" Blood Treatment & Processing Facility
Services & Tirade % Glass Production
= Transportation 8% Other Industry - Textile Industry Enterprise
@ Other Industry - Food Production & Other Industry - Chemical Products Enterprise
.' Agriculture, Fishing & Forestry @ Cocoa Production
® Construction IB Proppant Production - Other Industry
H Tourism

Figure 4.3 Sectors involving the most requests

493

4.681

4.682

4.683

Chapter 4 ARBITRATION

By and large, as stated herein, the 2018 newly proposed amendments to the ICSID Rules

stipulate certain conditions for PMs, provide non-exhaustive illustrations of the rights

to be protected,"

tribunals to decide on the PM requests and oblige the parties to notify arbitral tribunals
1075

set out the procedures to be followed, specify the deadlines for the
with any material changes in the circumstances that impact the recommended PMs.

The said amendments took into consideration the wealth of decisions pertaining to
PMs, since said amendments make express references to ‘urgency’, ‘necessity’ and ‘cur-
rent or imminent harm’ without packaging them as a closed list of conditions, hence
the open possibility for tribunals to continue to positively develop the jurisprudence
under the aegis of the ICSID Rules and the letter and spirit of the ICSID Convention.
It is also worth noting that the 2018 newly proposed amendments offer an innovative
temporal parameter, where arbitral tribunals would be required to render its decision on
the request within 30 days after the latest of: (i) the constitution of the Tribunal, (ii) the
last written submission on the request; or (iii) the last oral submission on the request. This is a
very positive development to streamline practices, control time and costs and cater for
the much-needed urgency of PMs.

Finally, the author does recognize the laborious and daunting task of amending the
ICSID Rules as well as the colossal efforts that such task entails on all levels. Neverthe-
less, the proposed amendments to the ICSID Rules are a positive step towards securing
ICSID’s leading role in administering international investment disputes. As eloquently
stated by Meg Kinnear: ‘[g]iven that ICSID administers over 70% of all international
investment disputes, the amendment process offers a significant opportunity to intro-
duce practical improvements to ISDS that will have an impact in the near term’.'°”
Indeed such amendments, including those pertaining to PMs, will mark the glistening

path for ICSID arbitrations.

refraining from changing the stazus quo or aggravating the dispute, and (iv) pre-award financial security. Moreover, the
sectors which scored highest on the number of PM requests (after the ‘Oil, Gas & Mining’ sector) are: the ‘Electric
Power & Other Energy’ sector with 61 PM requests in 17 cases, ‘Information & Communication sector with 40 PM
requests in nine cases, followed by the ‘Finance’ sector with 34 PM requests in 11 cases, ‘Services & Trade’ sector with
34 PM requests in seven cases, food production sector with 34 PMs requests in two cases and then the ‘transport’ sector
with 33 PM requests in nine cases.

1074 The examples stipulated in Rule 50 of the 2018 newly proposed amendments reflect the most established, frequently
invoked and accepted rights and PMs, namely: (i) preventing action that is likely to cause: current or imminent harm to
the other party; or prejudice to the arbitral process; (ii) maintaining or restoring the s¢atws guo pending determination of
the dispute; and (iii) preserving evidence that may be relevant to the resolution of the dispute. ibid. See Rule 50 of the
2018 newly proposed amendments of the ICSID Rules.

1075 ibid.

1076 Meg Kinnear, ‘Moving with the Times: Amending the ICSID Rules [2018], Columbia FDI Perspectives: Perspec-
tives on Topical Foreign Direct Investment Issues No. 233’ <http://ccsi.columbia.edu/files/2016/10/No-233-Kinnear-
FINAL. pdf> (accessed 03 September 2018).

494

