a) Wolters Kluwer

Document information

Publication

Journal of International
Arbitration

Topics

Investment Arbitration

Bibliographic reference

Régis Bismuth, ‘Anatomy of
the Law and Practice of
Interim Protective Measures
in International Investment
Arbitration’, Journal of
International Arbitration,

(© Kluwer Law International;
Kluwer Law International
2009, Volume 26 Issue 6) pp.
773 - 821

ow
P 773
P 774

P 774
P 775
vv

KluwerArbitration

Anatomy of the Law and Practice of Interim Protective
Measures in International Investment Arbitration

Régis Bismuth

(*)

Abstract

This article provides an overall analysis of the law and practice of interim protection in
international investment arbitration, covering the most commonly used arbitral frameworks
(International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) Convention, and the
Arbitration Rules of the ICSID Additional Facility, United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law (UNCITRAL), Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (SCC), International Chamber of
Commerce (ICC) and London Court of International Arbitration (LCIA)). It analyzes the legal
status of interim protective measures and more specifically their legal basis, their binding
force, and the procedural aspects of their adoption, highlighting significant dissimilarities
between ICSID Convention and other arbitral mechanisms when it comes to the role of
domestic courts in this process. The article also looks into the substantive aspects of interim
protection, a field where the differences between these frameworks tend to become less
pronounced. Despite wording differences in arbitration rules, we are witnessing an important
convergence of the practice of tribunals and a common reliance by arbitrators on the
jurisprudence of international courts and tribunals.

I Introduction

Where it concerns a dispute before a domestic, an international, or an arbitral tribunal,
the protection of the parties' rights cannot always await the final resolution of a case. This
is undoubtedly why the possibility of granting interim measures, as a device to remedy the
slowness of justice, isa common feature of these very distinct adjudicative bodies. The
interim protection of rights has even been considered as one of “those general principles
of law common to all legal systems,” (1) and even more, “an inherent art of the judicial
function of all courts.” (2) Beyond highlighting the fundamental role of interim measures for
every dispute settlement mechanism, it is noteworthy that interim relief turns down the
temporal process of adjudication which consists in a retrospective review of a case. (3) This
perspective reverses while considering interim relief because, as indicated by the
International Court of Justice (I.C.J.) in Application of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, “the Court, in deciding whether to indicate provisional
@ measures Is concerned, not so much with the past as with the present and with the
future.” (4) The judge expresses therefore a part of police powers, highlighting the mixtum
of imperium and jurisdictio included in any decision granting interim protection measures.

(5)

This question becomes particularly more complex in the case of international arbitration,
where the authority of the arbitral tribunal to grant interim measures is restricted by its
lack of coercive powers and potentially interacts with the parallel intervention of domestic
courts and their usual assistance to the arbitral process. (6) The complexity increases even
more inthe case of international investment arbitration, as this transnational process may
not only imply the neutralization of domestic courts' powers in certain contexts, but also
involve a state or state entity against which the scope of interim relief available may vary
considerably given their sovereign nature.

Within this framework, this article will conduct an analysis of the law and practice of
interim protective measures before arbitral tribunals adjudicating international
investment disputes. For the purpose of this research, the analysis will be limited to
arbitrations conducted under the International Center for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID) Convention and its Arbitration Rules; (7) the ICSID Additional Facility Rules;
(8) the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL); (9) the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (SCC); (10) the International Chamber
of Commerce (ICC); (11) and the London Court of International Arbitration (LCIA), (12) all of
them considered as the most “prominent arbitration rules” (13) in investment disputes.
However, two caveats must be highlighted regarding the scope of this study. First,
considering the lesser publicity of non-ICSID Convention arbitration, most of the @
decisions cited in this study emanate from tribunals constituted under the auspices of the
ICSID Convention. Secondly, considering that decisions on interim protective measures are
usually rendered as procedural orders, they do not benefit from the publicity rules for final
awards under the ICSID Arbitration Rules (14) and, consequently, are not all disclosed to
the public. Therefore, a few ICSID decisions were not consulted for the purpose of this
research.

Before dealing with the aforementioned issue, it is necessary to clarify the terminology
used inthis article. Authors and arbitration rules refer to provisional, interim,

1

© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
conservatory, protective, preliminary, or urgent measures. (15) Within this lax terminology,
(16) two elements must be taken into consideration: the nature of these measures and their
purpose. (17) They have the specificity to be adopted by the tribunal before its final
decision. The term “provisional” suggests that the validity of the measure is temporally
limited, which is, for instance, not the case of an order to withdraw from proceedings in
domestic courts. This is why the use of the neutral term “interim,” qualifying the lapse
between the initiation of the dispute and its final adjudication, is preferable. But the
adjective “interim” is not sufficient itself as such measures need to be distinguished from
other procedural incidents, such as ancillary claims on jurisdiction, that might also be
decided between the initiation of the proceedings and the final award. They are
fundamentally different, as ancillary claims consist in a jurisdictional decision of the
tribunal, whereas interim measures will be decided within the exercise of the tribunal's
administrative powers. (18) However, this subtlety has not been captured in practice and
the purpose of these measures allows the clarifying of this distinction. The measures at
issue are often characterized as “conservatory,” but this adjective suffers from the same
lacuna as the adjective “provisional” to the extent that it suggests a temporal limitation of
the protection of rights. A direction to withdraw from domestic proceedings or an order to
avoid the aggravation of the dispute are not best encapsulated inthe adjective
“conservatory” and the unequivocal term “protective” should be preferred. For these
reasons, this article will use the expression of “interim protective measures” or “interim
measures of protection,” the latter expression being used in Article 26 of the UNCITRAL

. Arbitration Rules.

P775
P 776

” This article is comprised of two parts reflecting two conceptual aspects of interim
protective measures in the context of international investment arbitration that must be
distinguished. The first relates to their legal status. While the bulk of this issue relates to
the power of arbitral tribunals to grant such measures, the residual or auxiliary role of
domestic courts and its relationship with arbitral tribunals will also be examined. The
second Part, from a more substantive perspective, deals with the scope of arbitral
tribunals' interim powers and the conditions under which they may grant such measures,
showing a great convergence in the practice of international investment arbitral tribunals
despite different textual bases. The overall analysis demonstrates that, although the
procedures of international investment arbitration were considered as linked to the
mechanisms of international commercial arbitration, tribunals have interpreted the lex
arbitralis (i.e., the procedural law to be applied by the arbitral tribunal) in light of
international tribunals, and notably the I.C.)., revealing therefore the imperium of an
international investment arbitrator considering and establishing himself as an
international judge.

ll Legal Status of Interim Protective Measures

An analysis of the legal status of interim protection in international investment arbitration
requires, first, an examination of the legal basis recognizing the power (chiefly of arbitral
tribunals) to grant such measures. This legal status also includes the controversial question
of their binding force.

A Power to grant interim protective measures

Although interim protective measures in investment disputes are more likely to be sought
before arbitral tribunals, it is important to stress the double function of domestic courts,
enforcing arbitral tribunals' decisions on interim measures as well as offering a forum to
seek interim relief.

1 Arbitral Tribunals' Power to Grant Interim Protective Measures

a Legal basis for granting interim protection

Except for the odd cases where there are no legal bases for such granting (under which the
arbitral tribunals’ ability to adopt such measures depends on the so-called “inherent
powers”), (19) the various international investment arbitration frameworks explicitly
empower arbitral tribunals to grant interim protection. However, a distinction must be
. made between the ICSID and other arbitration mechanisms.
P 776
P777
~ Legal basis in ICSID Convention arbitration. |CSID's special feature lies in its “self-
contained” (20) dimension, neutralizing the effect of the lex arbitri, enshrined in Article 44
of the ICSID Convention. It does not mean that the courts of the seat of arbitration are
prevented from dealing with such requests (“provided that [the parties] have so stipulated
inthe agreement recording their consent”), (21) but that the domestic law of the seat of
arbitration does not interfere with or impose mandatory rules on the ICSID arbitration
process. (22) It must be stressed that this solution is not applicable in the case of an
arbitration under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules which are not “insulated from national
law” (23) given the inapplicability of the Convention in this situation. In this respect, the
ICSID Additional Facility mechanism is to be treated as any non-ICSID arbitration system.
Therefore, the legal basis for granting interim protection within the framework of an ICSID

2
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
Convention arbitration is usually comprised of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules
representing the lex arbitralis generalis, and the specific provisions on interim measures
that may be included in the instrument(s) establishing the consent for the jurisdiction of
the tribunal. This is generally via a bilateral or a multilateral investment treaty (24) and/or
a specific agreement between the investor and the host state, representing the lex
arbitralis specialis. (25) The lex arbitralis specialis can be superseded by the mandatory
provisions of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules. (26)

Lex arbitralis in ICSID Convention Arbitration includes:

(1) mandatory provisions of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules;

(2) lex arbitralis specialis (instrument containing the consent to ICSID arbitration:
investment treaty, state investor agreement, state legislation, etc.);

(3) lex arbitralis generalis (ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules).

This structure should be highlighted in the decisions of arbitral tribunals that have tended
to indifferently consider these distinct layers of arbitration rules, (27) or to disregard @
their hierarchy. For instance, in Tanesco v. IPTL, the parties made the unusual choice in
their agreement to refer disputes to arbitration under the ICSID Convention and Arbitration
Rules, and decided at the same time that “[t]he Law governing the procedure and
administration of [t]he arbitration ... shall be the English law.” (28) This choice would not
have put this arbitration under the auspices of the English lex arbitri and the review of
English courts given the mandatory neutralization of the lex arbitri, but it should had led
the arbitrators to apply only the provisions of the English Arbitration Act 1996 related to
the procedural conduct of the arbitration (as the lex arbitralis specialis) while disregarding
the provisions on the role of domestic courts in the arbitral process. The arbitral tribunal
seemed, however, uncomfortable with this choice and attempted to avoid the issue of the
applicability of the provisions of the English Arbitration Act on the arbitral tribunal's
power to grant interim protection. Instead, the tribunal balanced the arbitral tribunal's
power under both mechanisms (English law and ICSID). The tribunal implied that the ICSID
Arbitration Rules superseded the lex arbitralis generalis, and concluded:

rs
P 777
P 778
vv

that we have jurisdiction to make the recommendations sought, provided that they satisfy
the requirements of Rule 39, which is all the power the Tribunal would have even if section
39 of the English Arbitration Act applied (as to which it is unnecessary for us to reach or
express any conclusion). (29)

In the author's opinion, this is the wrong approach. The general authority for the granting of
interim protection in an ICSID arbitration is to be found in Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention providing that “[e]xcept as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it
considers that the circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which
should be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party,” and is complemented by
Article 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the content of which will be examined below. The
lex arbitralis specialis may modify this general authority. Specific provisions on interim
measures are, for instance, included in North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) (30)
or the 2004 U.S. Model Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT). (31) The existence of specific
provisions on interim measures in the lex arbitralis specialis does not necessarily mean
that it covers broader issues than the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules, but only that
the former shall prevail in case of a conflict between the two, (32) on the condition that
they remain within the limits of party autonomy permitted by the Convention and the
Arbitration Rules and within the jurisdictional boundaries of Article 25 of the ICSID
8 Convention. For instance, the ICSID Convention refe rs to measures “to preserve the
S779 respective rights of either party,” whe reas the wording of NAFTA, @ Article 1134 includes
~ measures “to preserve the rights of a disputing party, or to ensure that the Tribunal's

jurisdiction is made fully effective.” Thus, in the case of a NAFTA arbitration under the ICSID
Convention, the tribunal's authority to grant interim measures will be determined under
the broader scope of NAFTA, Article 1134. (33) In a similar fashion, the ICSID Convention
indicates that the tribunal may “recommend” such measures, whereas NAFTA provides that
the tribunal may “order” them. However, these distinctions are of little importance in
practice.

Legal basis in non-ICSID Convention arbitration. In the case of a non-ICSID Convention
arbitration, the legal basis for the granting of interim measures by the arbitral tribunal is
primarily to be found in the arbitration rules chosen by the parties, representing the lex
arbitralis generalis. Should the arbitration rules be silent on this point, which is not the
case for the rules considered in this article, the general interim power of the arbitral
tribunal lies ina potential empowerment by the lex arbitri, such as what is provided in the
UNCITRAL Model Law. (34) This general power is supplemented by the possible provisions
on interim measures included in the instrument(s) establishing the consent to the
jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal (for instance, an investment treaty or a state contract
where parties have crafted their own arbitration rules provisions), representing the lex
arbitralis specialis. These two layers of rules are superseded (35) by the mandatory
provisions of the lex arbitri of the seat of the arbitration and of the arbitration rules
chosen by the parties. (36)

Lex arbitralis in non-ICSID Convention arbitration includes:

3
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
(1) mandatory provisions of the lex arbitri of the seat of arbitration;
(2) mandatory rules of the lex arbitralis generalis;

(3) lex arbitralis specialis (in the instrument containing the consent to the arbitration:
investment treaty, state investor agreement, state legislation, etc.);

(4) lex arbitralis generalis (institutional or ad hoc arbitration rules chosen by the parties:
Arbitration Rules of ICSID Additional Facility mechanism, UNCITRAL, ICC, SCC, LCIA,

etc.);
. (5) lex arbitri (seat of arbitration).
P 779
P 780

This structure was highlighted in an interim award rendered in Encana v. Ecuador, where
the arbitral tribunal, although not mentioning the mandatory aspects, stated:

Two different provisions are potentially relevant to an order for interim measures of
protection in the present case, Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules and Article XIII(8) of the
BIT. As a specific provision applicable to investments by Canadian corporations in
Ecuador, Article XIII(8) must prevail over the general power in Article 26 of the UNCITRAL
Rules. (37)

The most frequent set of rules used in non-ICSID Convention arbitration empower arbitral
tribunals to grant interim measures. (38) These interim measure provisions may be
supplemented and amended by the lex arbitralis specialis in a similar fashion to the
aforementioned situations in ICSID arbitration. The mandatory rules included in the lex
arbitri can affect the ability of arbitral tribunals to grant interim measures, but such
provisions are rare, and the main role of the lex arbitriin this respect relates to the ability
given to domestic courts to adopt interim measures in aid of the arbitration. (39) In the
rest of the article, the unlikely situations of provisions prohibiting (40) arbitral tribunals or
substantially abridging (41) their authority to grant interim measures in the lex arbitralis
specialis in the case of an ICSID arbitration and in the lex arbitralis specialis and/or the lex
arbitri in the case of a non-ICSID arbitration will not be examined.

The legal basis for the granting of interim measures in international investment arbitration
is therefore well established and shows a distinction of legal regimes between the ICSID
Convention system and other arbitration mechanisms. Within these disparate frameworks,
the procedural aspects of interim protection need to be highlighted.

b Procedural aspects of arbitral tribunals' powers to grant interim protection

Ratione temporis aspects (acceleration of the procedure). A few preliminary remarks on
parties’ possibility of requesting interim measures are important. International arbitration
is highly praised for its overall speed, but this comparative advantage is reduced in
relation to interim measures given that the requesting party might wait for the constitution
» Of anarbitral tribunal, whereas domestic courts are immediately available in international

P 780 litigation. Although international arbitration frameworks do not usually prevent parties @

P781 from requesting interim protection from domestic courts during this critical lapse, (42)
some efforts have been made to empower arbitration mechanisms to administer interim
measures requests before the formation of the arbitral tribunal.

Indeed, recent amendments to the ICSID Arbitration Rules in 2006 provide the possibility
for a party of filing a request for interim measures as soon as a dispute is registered with
the Centre. Article 39(5) of ICSID Arbitration Rules empowers the ICSID Secretary General to
administer the request by “fix[ing] time limits for the parties to present observations ... so
that the request and observations may be considered by the Tribunal promptly upon its
constitution.” A truly innovative solution would have been to establish a mechanism
empowering a permanent authority to administer and adjudicate interim measures until
the constitution of the arbitral tribunal, therefore neutralizing the potential difficulties in
its formation, but such a solution would have required an amendment to the ICSID
Convention and therefore the approval of all contracting states. (43)

This possibility has been set up by some arbitral institutions. The ICC established in 1990 a
“pre-arbitral referee procedure” but its opt-in basis, meaning that parties wishing to have
recourse to such procedures must make specific reference in their arbitration agreements,
has rendered this mechanism almost unused. (44) A recent amendment to the American
Arbitration Association-International Center for Dispute Resolution (AA-ICDR) Arbitration
Rules (45) in 2006 has established a genuine interim relief procedure before the formation
of the tribunal by permitting the appointment of an emergency arbitrator. (46) Contrary to
the ICC pre-arbitral referee procedure, this mechanism is integrated in the standard
arbitration rules and is applicable unless the parties agreed otherwise. (47) However, given
that the AAA-ICDR Rules are not commonly used in investment disputes, the only way to
obtain interim measures before the formation of the ICSID Tribunal still lies in the purview
of domestic courts.

Beyond this modest corrective intended to accelerate the process, It is usually recognized
that, depending upon urgency, interim measures requests may be filed by parties. (48)
Such measures may be adopted, modified, or lifted by the arbitral tribunal (49) @ at any
time between the appointment of the tribunal and the final award, regardless of whether

7
P 781
P 782
vW

4
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
the plain jurisdiction of the tribunal is established. (50) As pointed out by the ICSID arbitral
tribunal in Casado v. Chile:

It isin the very nature of the institution of provisional measures that they are ... above all
urgent, that is to say that they must be or be able to be decided quickly ... These measures
must therefore be capable of being taken, recommended, indicated or commanded ... at
any stage of the proceedings and in consequence also before the Tribunal has been able to
rule on all of the objections to its jurisdiction or on the admissibility of the claim on the
merits. (51)

Likewise, in Railroad v. Guatemala, it was underlined that “the power of the Tribunal to
grant provisional measures is not limited to any particular phase of a proceeding.” (52) The
ICSID Arbitration Rules underline that the “Tribunal shall give priority to the consideration
of a request” for such measures. This feature highlights the specific accelerated procedure
of interim measures of protection that are dissociated from the usual temporal framework
of adjudication. (53)

Initiative of the request and proprio motu powers of arbitral tribunals. In ICSID arbitration,
both parties have the right to request interim measures but the arbitral tribunal may also
grant them on its own initiative. The situation is different under UNCITRAL, SCC, ICC, and
LCIA Arbitration Rules, all requiring a special request of the party. (54) It must be noted
that such requests may be filed by the claimant, the respondent, or both parties. (55)

The specific power of ICSID tribunals to order interim measures proprio mutu does not play
a great role at the triggering level. (56) Besides, international tribunals have rarely and
P 789 only in exceptional situations used this power. (57) It may, however, have an impact on the
—pyaz_ range of measures that may be decided ultra petita by the arbitral tribunal. (58) Indeed, @
~ although the ICSID Arbitration Rules underline that the tribunal “give priority to the

consideration of a request made [by a party],” (59) it “may also recommend provisional
measures on its own initiative or recommend measures other than those specified ina
request.” (60) For instance, in the first dispute under the ICSID Convention, Holiday Inns v.
Morocco, the tribunal granted other interim measures than those requested by the
claimant. (61) This authority is notable in enabling the tribunal to grant less restrictive
measures than those requested but pursuing “the same objective.” (62) Non-ICSID arbitral
tribunals do not enjoy this ability to decide interim measures ultra petita but the lex
arbitralis specialis may potentially serves as an extension of arbitral tribunal powers in this
matter. For instance, the specific sections on interim measures of NAFTA and the 2004 U.S.
Model BIT both provide that “[a] tribunal may order an interim measure of protection,” but
a party's request is not a prerequisite. (63)

Due process rights. Both ICSID arbitration mechanisms impose on the arbitral tribunal the
obligation to respect the due process right of the respondent. Indeed, the Arbitration Rules
and the Additional Facility Rules provide that the tribunal may adopt, modify, or revoke
interim measures only “after giving each party an opportunity of presenting Its
observations.” (64)

Such provisions are curiously absent from non-ICSID arbitration frameworks and, more
broadly, from arbitration rules and lex arbitri. (65) It may be argued that interim measures’
specific procedures are covered by general due process rights of the arbitration
P7 framework. (66) The UNCITRAL Rules provide, for instance, that arbitration is conducted to
83 ; = . oe ; a
—pya, ensure that “each party is given a full opportunity of presenting his @ case, (67) similar

y provisions being included in the SCC, ICC, and LCIA Rules. (68) Besides, a tribunalina

recent investment dispute under the UNCITRAL Rules also adopted this stance. (69)

Some authors have nevertheless wondered if the absence of explicit due process rights in
the provisions on interim measures leaves room for ex parte motions, which are frequent in
the situation of requests before domestic courts, and sometimes necessary considering the
risk of fleeing assets if the respondent is given the opportunity to present his case. (70)
Besides, it could be possible to reach the same result in ICSID arbitration if the lex
arbitralis specialis is silent on this issue and ICSID Arbitration Rules are deemed voluntary.
This highly controversial question has been considered cautiously, and even negatively,
(71) although it is argued that, due to a tribunal's ability to lift such measures at any time
of the proceedings, ex parte motions are possible in exceptional cases (72) and under
specific conditions regarding their duration. (73) A similar position has been taken by the
I.C.J. (74) Such a stance may, however, be undesirable or risky since a “[flailure to give the
other party an opportunity to be heard will amount to a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure” (75) and such violations of the principle of adversarial
proceedings may expose an arbitral award to annulment in the case of an ICSID Convention
arbitration. (76) Or, under other mechanisms, it may prevent its recognition and
enforcement for other arbitration frameworks under the New York Convention. (77)

Importantly, the impossibility of obtaining interim relief before the appointment of the
arbitral tribunal is coupled with the general adversarial framework of interim measures in
investment arbitration, thereby sometimes diminishing their efficiency. This has made it
necessary to have recourse to domestic courts, though their role and the interplay with
. arbitral tribunals need to be clarified.
P 784
P 785

5
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
2 Double Function of Domestic Courts

Domestic courts sometimes constitute a more convenient forum where a party might,
under certain limitations, directly seek interim relief. They are also the forum where a
party will seek to enforce arbitral interim protective measures.

a Potential recourse to domestic courts to seek interim measures

In ICSID Convention arbitration. Seeking interim relief before domestic courts within the
framework of an arbitration conducted under the ICSID Convention was a problematic
issue until 1984. The Convention and initial Arbitration Rules were silent on this point, the
emphasis of ICSID Article 26 on the “[clonsent of the parties to arbitration under this
Convention ... to the exclusion of any other remedy” provided arguments to opponents as
well as proponents of the power of domestic courts to grant interim protection, (78) and
the solutions adopted by domestic courts and arbitral tribunal on this issue were
inconsistent. (79) In Atlantic Triton Co. v. People's Revolutionary Republic of Guinea, the
arbitral tribunal suggested that its jurisdiction to recommend interim measures should not
be regarded as “exclusive and prohibit any recourse to national courts” but underlined at
the same time that the “question as to whether the Washington Convention and the ICSID
Rules stand apart as compared with all other arbitral regimes is a very delicate one.” (80)
In order to dispel doubts, an amendment to the Arbitration Rules was adopted in 1984. (81)
It is now located in Article 39(6) of the Arbitration Rules and provides:

Nothing in this Rule shall prevent the parties, provided that they have so stipulated in the
agreement recording their consent, from requesting any judicial or other authority to order
provisional measures, prior to or after the institution of the proceeding, for the
preservation of their respective rights and interests.

The power of domestic courts to adopt interim measures under the ICSID Convention is
therefore subject to the explicit consent of the parties in the lex arbitralis specialis. This
system tends to reconcile the self-contained nature of investment arbitration under the
Convention with the consent-based approach of international arbitration. However, @ the
power of domestic courts is strictly limited given that states “will generally refuse to
submit expressly to the jurisdiction of the courts of third countries for interim relief.” (82)
For instance, NAFTA and the 2004 U.S. Model BIT specify the possibility for an investor
initiating arbitration proceedings to seek interim relief but it is limited to certain
measures and to domestic courts and tribunals of the defending party, (83) and it is
unlikely that an agreement between the state and the investor might make a provision for
interim protection. In addition, this limited power, where present, does raise some
problematic procedural issues.

a
P 785
P 786
vv

First of all, in the unlikely case where such power has been provided for in the lex arbitralis
specialis, a request for interim relief before domestic courts prior to the start of ICSID
proceedings cannot be considered as a choice of dispute settlement mechanism. Under
the electa una via, non datur recursus ad alteram principle, included in some investment
treaties and known as the “fork in the road” mechanism, (84) the first choice of a dispute
settlement mechanism by the investor is considered as irrevocable. Interim measure
requests before national courts are possible at any time of the proceedings if the parties
agree, therefore a request filed before the engagement of ICSID arbitration which amounts
to a choice of domestic courts over the arbitration is an inaccurate solution. Sucha
position would do violence to the explicit consent of parties and would lead, at the same
time, to asymmetrical situations where the same request is considered irrevocable before
the arbitration and as an admissible protection during the arbitration. It does not mean,
however, that domestic courts may adopt any measures at this stage, since their decisions
must not overlap with the exclusive jurisdiction and authority of the tribunal. Indeed, a
domestic interim order in its form equivalent to a decision on the merits in substance
could possibly be considered asa “fork in the road” choice. (85)

A second, less theoretical procedural issue raises the question of the legal effect ofa
request for interim relief filed in domestic courts prior to the initiation of arbitral
proceedings under the ICSID Convention when parties did not previously consent to the
availability of such measures. It could legitimately be argued in this situation that the
party claiming interim relief in domestic courts has made a choice incompatible witha
future ICSID arbitration. Two arguments can be discerned. First, on the issue of the

p 786 availability of the ICSID mechanism, a party's request for interim reliefin a domestic forum

P7387 that would have been inaccessible during the arbitration affects, in our view, @ the

~ jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. Secondly, the presence of a “fork in the road” provision

in the lex arbitralis specialis could constitute an implicit choice for a specific dispute
settlement mechanism that allows interim measures at the pre-arbitral stage, such as the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. (86) Investors should therefore pro-actively assess the
opportunity to request interim measures in domestic courts. (87) If they are considered as
effective devices to put the host state under pressure and force it to settle the dispute,
they may limit, in the future, dispute settlement options available and direct the claimant
towards a non-ICSID Convention arbitration system that would be under the control of the
lex arbitri and the review of the 1958 New York Convention.

In non-ICSID Convention arbitration. Under other investment arbitration systems, the
availability of interim relief before domestic courts is not limited or subject to the
restriction encountered in the ICSID Convention mechanism. (88) ICSID Additional Facility

6
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
Rules provide indeed that “[t]he parties may apply to any competent judicial authority for
interim or conservatory measures.” (89) Arbitration Rules of UNCITRAL, (90) SCC, (91) ICC,
(92) and LCIA (93) also allow for interim protection before all domestic courts, and not only
those of the seat of arbitration. Although these rules converge on this possibility, they
differ on their respective application.

UNCITRAL, SCC, and ICSID Additional Facility Rules do not impose ratione temporis
conditions under which seeking interim relief in domestic courts is possible. This silence
indicates that parties may have recourse to national courts at any time during the
proceedings. The situation is different under the ICC Rules, which provide that interim
protection in domestic courts is available “[b]efore the file is transmitted to the Arbitral
Tribunal and in appropriate circumstances even thereafter,” (94) and under LCIA Rules
under which the same relief may be requested “before the formation of the Arbitral
Tribunal and, in exceptional cases, thereafter.” (95) These provisions establish a “principle
of @ priority” (96) of arbitral tribunals over domestic courts as soon as the arbitral process
is launched. It is difficult to interpret accurately the expressions “in appropriate
circumstances” and “in exceptional cases,” both indicating that the availability of
domestic courts is to be determined ona case-by-case basis. (97) Authors have, however,
attempted to draw guidelines from practice, which indicate that domestic courts are
appropriate forums: in situations of urgency, when the arbitral tribunal has no power to
grant the measure sought, or in situations of paralysis or inability of the arbitral tribunal.
(98) Actually, the latter conditions suggest more a ratione materiae than a ratione temporis
allocation of power to grant interim relief between domestic courts and arbitral tribunals.
These ratione materiae aspects will be analyzed below with the conditions for the granting
of interim measures.

P 787
P 788
vv

Although the interplay between courts and arbitral tribunals might be conflicting, it should
not overshadow the fact that the action of domestic courts is usually taken to assist the
arbitration and that domestic courts are also a forum where interim relief granted by an
arbitral tribunal will be enforced.

b Enforcement of arbitral interim measures in domestic courts

Interim protective measures granted by arbitral tribunals are not self-executing, unlike
those adopted by national courts. Given this circumstance and the ratione materiae
allocation of interim measures between domestic courts and arbitral tribunals, arbitrators
“generally refrain from ordering measures that intrinsically require the use of coercive
powers.” (99) Moreover, considering an arbitrator's ability to draw negative inferences from
non-compliance, (100) parties toward whom those measures are directed generally
spontaneously comply with them, (101) and thus their enforcement before domestic courts
is not the most common problem. The fundamental mechanisms of enforcement, however,
deserve to be analyzed. Again, a significant difference exists between ICSID Convention
arbitration and other frameworks.

Unenforceability of ICSID Convention arbitral interim protective measures. Article 47 of the
ICSID Convention provides that the arbitral tribunal may “recommend any provisional

*~ measures.” The term “recommend” is also laid down in Article 39 of the ICSID Arbitration

P 788 : . . : . ops
—pyaq Rules. Given this terminology, the question of their enforceability should @ be posed. (102)

~ Rather, as discussed below, ICSID tribunals have often interpreted this terminology very
broadly so as to consider that measures granted under Article 47 may not just bea
“recommendation,” but also an “order.” (103) However, regardless of the debate on their
legal nature, it appears that interim protective measures cannot benefit from the
advantageous legal regime of enforcement of ICSID awards.

The only mechanism for the enforcement of ICSID decisions before domestic courts lies in
Article 54 of the ICSID Convention providing that “[e]ach Contracting State shall recognize
an award rendered pursuant to this Convention as binding and enforce the pecuniary
obligations imposed by that award as if it were a final judgment of a court in that state.” If
no definition of the term “award” is provided by the Convention, (104) it is possible to infer
from other provisions of the Convention (105) that only final awards are covered by Article
54. Other decisions made by the arbitral tribunal during the proceedings, such as decisions
on jurisdiction, recommending or ordering interim measures, or other procedural orders,
are consequently outside the scope of the automatic recognition and enforcement
mechanism of the Convention. (106) It must also be stressed that the lex arbitralis specialis
cannot, in our opinion, transform an arbitral decision on provisional measures into an
award benefiting from the enforcement mechanism of the ICSID Convention. (107) The only
way for interim measures granted by an ICSID tribunal to be enforced before domestic
courts lies, therefore, in their incorporation in the final award, as for instance in Tanesco v.
IPTL. (108) However, without being in the realm of enforcement, it is certain that arbitral
interim measures in the form of anti suit injunctions recommending or ordering parties to
abstain from domestic legal proceedings may have a significant persuasive role over
domestic courts decisions. (109)

Controversial enforceability of non-ICSID Convention arbitral interim measures. There are
two ways of envisaging the enforcement of arbitral interim measures in domestic courts. @
They can be enforced abroad or before the courts of the seat of arbitration. Given that
there is commonly little connection between the state of the seat of arbitration, which is
deemed to be neutral for parties in international investment arbitration, (110) the matter

7
P 789
P 790
vW

7
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
of the enforcement of interim measures before the courts of the seat of arbitration
(therefore under the lex arbitri) will not be considered. (111) The analysis will focus on the
enforcement abroad through the 1958 New York Convention. (112)

Assessing the enforceability of arbitral interim measures under the New York Convention
requires a prior determination of their legal nature. Non-ICSID Convention arbitration rules
commonly used in investment arbitration do not all define precisely the nature of arbitral
decisions granting interim measures. The aforementioned ICSID Additional Facility, SCC,
and LCIA Rules simply indicate that the arbitral tribunal may or shall have the power to
“order” interim measures. (113) ICC Rules are more precise and provide that “[a]ny such
measure shall take the form of an order, giving reasons, or of an Award, as the Arbitral
Tribunal considers appropriate.” (114) Lastly, the UNCITRAL Rules leave no doubt by
specifying that “[s]uch interim measures may be established in the form of an interim
award.” (115) This diversity has implied a diverse terminology, where interim measures
have been issued as “interim award,” “partial award,” “decision,” or “procedural order.” The
distinction between “award” and “order” or “decision” is, however, significant within the
framework of international arbitration. In contrast to an “order” or a “decision,” an “award”
must be motivated and its content must follow certain rules, (116) it has res judicata effect
and it cannot be issued ex parte. (117)

The recognition and enforcement mechanism established by the New York Convention is
applicable to “arbitral awards,” (118) but no precise definition of this expression is given
by this convention. Ona strictly formal plan, orders, procedural orders, or decisions
adopted by arbitral tribunals are not “awards” and cannot intuitively benefit from the New
York Convention. The situation in practice is, however, more complicated, and domestic

p 790 courts, in the few cases involving this issue, have tended to assess the “finality of the

579, decision” (119) for which enforcement is sought more than the terminology used by the @

y arbitrators. (120) French, U.S., and English courts have, for instance, considered the form of
the decision as an irrelevant element in deciding on its enforceability. (121) In this
“substance over form” (122) analysis, some domestic courts have enforced arbitral
decisions granting interim protective measures to the extent that the measures in question
were both final and severable from the rest of the dispute. (123) This highlights the
terminological laxity mentioned above. It is, indeed, necessary to draw a distinction within
the category of interim measures between those that are final on an issue and those of a
provisional character, reversible in nature, that may be lifted at any time by the arbitral
tribunal.

These trends do not, of course, overshadow the disparities between domestic courts. (124)
Besides, this issue was on the agenda of UNCITRAL which included in its recent amendment
of the Model Law specific provisions for the enforcement of arbitral interim measures. (125)
This possibility offered by some domestic courts to assist the arbitral process highlights,
however, a significant difference with investment arbitrations carried out under the regime
of the ICSID Convention, where arbitral interim measures cannot be enforced and are
locked up until the final award in the self-contained regime established by the Convention.
For this reason, the scope and legal implications of the duty to comply with provisional
measures is of great importance in the ICSID system.

B Compliance with interim protective measures within the arbitral framework

While arbitral tribunals have the power to grant interim protective measures that might be
enforced in domestic courts in certain situations, the core issue of compliance @ goes
beyond the question of their enforceability and lies mainly in the power to ensure
compliance within the arbitral framework. It is therefore necessary to determine exactly
the binding force of arbitral interim measures, before highlighting the legal consequences
of non-compliance.

ts,
P791
P 792
vW

1 Binding Force of Interim Protective Measures

A peculiar distinction is to be mentioned between ICSID Convention arbitration and the
other arbitration mechanisms. Whereas Article 47 of the ICSID Convention provides that the
tribunal may only “recommend” interim relief, other arbitration rules recognize the power
of tribunals to “order,” (126) “order or recommend,” (127) or “take” (128) interim measures.
While it seems intuitively that such measures adopted under the ICSID Convention are not
binding, the practice of arbitral tribunals has weakened this textual distinction and
admitted their binding force. Some insights into the underlying theoretical debate on the
justification of their binding force provide a useful avenue to understand the nature of
arbitral interim protective measures.

a Source of the binding force

Textual source for non-ICSID Convention arbitration. As mentioned above, non-ICSID
Convention frameworks empower arbitral tribunals to “order” or “take” interim measures.
The wording of Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules referring to the term “take” should be
clarified. This rule specifies that the tribunal has, among others, the power to take
“measures for the conservation of the goods forming the subject-matter in dispute, such as
ordering their deposit.” (129) There is consequently no doubt that a tribunal conducting an
arbitration under the UNCITRAL Rules has the power to “order” interim relief.

Considering the consensual nature of international arbitration, there is no doubt that

8
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
interim measures granted as “orders” by tribunals in non-ICSID Convention arbitrations are
binding on parties.

Praetorian source for ICSID Convention Arbitration. Putting aside the specific cases
empowering an arbitral tribunal to “order” interim measures through the lex arbitralis
p 799 specialis, or the possibility for arbitral tri bunals to seek the bindi ng agreement of parties
D793 tO implement them, (130) the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules both refer to the @
~ authority of the arbitral tribunal to “recommend” interim measures. The French and the
Spanish versions use the verbs “recommander” and “recomendar” and the terms
“recommandation” and “recomendacion.” A simple textual analysis indicates clearly that
ICSID tribunals lack the power to order interim measures binding on parties. This is also
corroborated by the Convention's travaux préparatoires showing “a conscious decision...
not to grant the Tribunal the power to order binding provisional measures.” (131) Despite
clear wording which leaves little room for even a far-fetched and extensive interpretation,
some arbitral tribunals have understood these provisions to establish the compulsory
nature of such measures. ICSID tribunals dealing with Article 47 of the Convention have
always used the term “recommend” and never mention the potential mandatory
dimension of interim measures. (132) Besides, in Atlantic Triton v. Guinea, the arbitral
tribunal opposed its “jurisdiction to recommend conservatory measures” with the one of
national courts “traditionally and virtually universally recognized as having sole
jurisdiction to order such measures.” (133)

The positions of the arbitral tribunals in Maffezini v. Spain and in Casado v. Chile overturned
this well-established interpretation and determined that such measures should not be
viewed as recommendations but as binding arbitral decisions. The tribunals’ legal
arguments in both cases were, however, highly questionable.

In Maffezini v. Spain, the tribunal considered the “semantic difference between the word
‘recommend’ as used in Rule 39 and the word ‘order’ as used elsewhere in the Rules to
describe the Tribunal's ability to require a party to take a certain action [as] more
apparent than real” and deemed “the word ‘recommend’ to be of equivalent value to the
word ‘order,’ ” concluding that “[t]he Tribunal's authority to rule on provisional measures is
no less binding than that of a final award.” (134) The tribunal justified its interpretation by
a reference to the Spanish version of the Arbitration Rules using the word “dictaci6n.” (135)
The tribunal does not specify where this term is located in the Arbitration Rules. The
closest word to be found in Article 39 is part of the expression referring to “las
circunstancias que hacen necesario el dictado de tales medidas,” understood in the
p 793 English version as “the circumstances that require such measures.” In our view, this tribunal
Py, @ mixed up two distinct aspects. The term “recommend” is used to define the tribunal's
~ procedural power and therefore the legal nature and value of its decision adopting interim
measures. The term “require” (of course more directive than “recommend”) relates to the
substantive conditions under which the measures may be adopted. The latter expression
should therefore be read as “the circumstances that require such measures to be
recommended.” (136)

The arbitral tribunal's reasoning in Casado v. Chile is far more elaborate and is based on
different grounds. Although mentioning the Maffezini decision in passing, the tribunal
deemed that “this question can today be considered closed, in the light of the general
jurisprudence and a recent decision of the International Court of Justice.” (137) Indeed,
relying on the then recent judgment of the I.C.J. in LaGrand, (138) where the Court “reached
the conclusion that orders on provisional measures under Article 41 [of the I.C.J. Statute]
have binding effect,” (139) the arbitrators upheld the binding legal value of interim
measures. This holding stems from the conclusion of the tribunal that:

It is clear from the preceding that provisional measures are principally aimed at
preserving or protecting the efficiency of the decision that is given on the merits; they are
intended to avoid prejudicing the execution of judgment, or prevent a party, by unilateral
act or omission infringing the rights of the opposing party. (140)

The pertinence of some arbitrators’ arguments justifying this binding nature can be called
into question. To begin to justify its position the tribunal relied on Article 41 of the I.C.J.
Statute and its interpretation in LaGrand. Such “analogies” (a terminology used twice by
the tribunal to comprehend the interplay between the ICSID and I.C.J. systems) (141) are
highly questionable considering the principle of party autonomy in international
arbitration. Differences exist indeed between the terms “recommend” of the ICSID
Convention and Arbitration Rules, and the term “indicate” embedded in the I.C.J. Statute.
The same comments apply to the references made to the jurisprudence of the Iran-United
States Claims Tribunal where proceedings were conducted under the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules. (142)

On another note, the tribunal seems to consider with variable intensity the relevance of
the legislative history of these distinct procedural rules. The fact that the |.C.J. took the
travaux préparatoires of its Statute into account seemed to be a relevant element for the
tribunal. (143) Likewise, the tribunal mentioned the first draft of the former rules of ICSID,
p 794 stating in an explanatory note that Article 47 of the Convention is “based on the principle
Syo5 @ that... the parties should not take steps that might aggravate or extend their dispute.”
~ (144) However, when considering the opinions expressed by various commentators, the
tribunal mentioned “the questionable method of interpretation which consists of referring

9
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
to the travaux préparatoires where the term ‘prescribes’ was eventually replaced by
‘recommend.’ ” (145)

Regardless of its solution, the arbitrators' interpretation should have stressed the public
international law nature of the ICSID Convention from which the Arbitration Rules stem.
According to the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, a treaty must be
interpreted “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the
terms of the treaty.” (146) The ordinary meaning of the terms “recommend” (understood as
“to praise or commend to another as being desirable or worthy”) (147) leaves little room for
any binding dimension of provisional measures within the ICSID Convention framework. The
term “indicate” laid down in the I.C.J. Statute (and defined as “to show or to point out” (148)
) is more directive than “recommend.” The parallel between the two terms attempted by
the arbitrators in Casado not only violated the principle of party autonomy in international
commercial arbitration, but was also not in conformity with the basic rules of
interpretation of treaties in international law, expressing the junction between the two
legal spheres in which ICSID Convention arbitration occurs.

There are no reasonable (strictly legal) bases to support the tribunal's interpretation of the
ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules in Casado. We might consider that the presence of
the |.C.J. judge Momahed Bedjaoui, who sat on the I.C.J. in LaGrand only three months
before this arbitral decision, greatly influenced the arbitral tribunal's position. Besides
this speculative argument, the justification of the appropriation of the power to order
interim measures by ICSID tribunals, if any, is to be found elsewhere.

b Justification of the binding force

Although Casado should have constituted a very persuasive ruling for future tribunals for
ICSID Convention disputes, subsequent arbitral tribunals have not systematically

p 795 emphasized the binding nature of the interim measures granted. In SGS v. Pakistan, (149)

D796 Zhinvali v. Georgia, (150) Plama v. Bulgaria, (151) Biwater v. Tanzania (152) and @ Saipem v.

~ Bangladesh, (153) the arbitral tribunals only mentioned the terminology related to

“recommendation” and avoided the issue of their binding nature. It is, of course, delicate
to determine whether these tribunals comprehended the interim measures they granted
as mandatory or not, and it is certainly unlikely that arbitrators would stress the non-
binding nature of such measures in their decisions. In Tokios Tokelés, the arbitral tribunal
followed the Casado ruling and suggested that even labeled as “recommendations,” such
measures would be deemed binding on the parties:

It is to be recalled that, according to a well-established principle laid down by the
jurisprudence of the ICSID tribunals, provisional measures “recommended” by an ICSID
tribunal are legally compulsory; they are in effect “ordered” by the tribunal, and the
parties are under a legal obligation to comply with them. (154)

This position, adopted again more recently in OPC v. Ecuador, (155) was more specifically
reaffirmed in City Oriente v. Ecuador, where the tribunal underlined that the question of the
binding nature of interim measures is less an issue of textual interpretation (i.e., the
meaning of the term “recommendation”), than a functional dimension. The tribunal stated
that:

Even disregarding such semantic discussion, a teleological interpretation of both
provisions leads to the conclusion that the provisional measures recommended are
necessarily binding. The Tribunal may only order such measures if their adoption is
necessary to preserve the rights of the parties and guarantee that the award will fulfill its
purpose of providing effective judicial protection. Such goals may only be reached if the
measures are binding, and they share the exact same binding nature as the final arbitral
award. Therefore, it is the Tribunal's conclusion that the word ‘recommend’ is equal in
value to the word ‘order’. (156)

It is necessary to replace the tribunal's functional argumentation in City Oriente in the
more global discussion on the power of international tribunals and courts to adopt binding
interim measures. Indeed, these ICSID decisions were given in the wake of the I.C.J.'s
LaGrand ruling, which is considered as the starting point of a “new judicial customary rule.”
(157) Although the I.C.J. in LaGrand has drawn its conclusion from, inter alia, an
p 796 interpretation of Article 41 of its Statute, this decision has served asa global authoritative
5797 Precedent not only for ICSID tribunals but also for other international courts such as the @
~ European Court of Human Rights. (158) Several arguments have been put forward to justify
the existence of this power regardless of its textual basis. (159) Indeed, the existence of an
overarching rule or principle of public international law must be determined in order to
give a rationale for the circumvention of a treaty provision such as that carried out by
ICSID arbitral tribunals.

It is first possible to comprehend this power under the notion of “the general principles of
law recognized by civilized nations” as a source of international law by Article 38(1)(c) of
the Statute of the I.C.J. Inthe LaGrand case, the I.C.). relied on the ruling of the former
Permanent Court of International Justice (PCIJ) in Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgaria,
recognizing the provisions related to interim measures in its Statute, which:

[Alpplies the principle universally accepted by international tribunals ... to the effect that
the parties to a case must abstain from any measure capable of exercising a prejudicial

10
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
effect in regard to the execution of the decision to be given and, in general, not allow any
step of any kind to be taken which might aggravate or extend the dispute. (160)

Considering the widespread embedding of this principle in domestic legal orders (161) and
its recognition by international courts, the binding nature of interim measures in public
international law may be viewed as stemming from this general principle, orasa
subcategory of the principle of good faith. (162) Although the PCIJ decision was mentioned
in Casado (163) and in City Oriente, (164) both arbitral tribunals did so only to determine
the circumstances under which interim measures may be granted, but not to justify their
binding nature. In Casado, the tribunal, citing excerpts of explanatory notes of the first
draft of former ICSID Rules, noted that “Article 47 of the ICSID Convention is ‘based on the
principle that once a dispute is submitted to arbitration the parties should not take steps
that might aggravate or extend their dispute or prejudice the execution of the award,’ a
principle which has a certain ‘generality,’ ” (165) but used those notes as a persuasive
«4 argument and did not specify how this principle overarches the ICSID Convention.
P 797
P 798
~ Another argument put forward lies in the so-called theory of the “inherent powers” of
courts and tribunals stemming from the essence of the judicial function itself. (166) This
theory was explicitly referred to by the I.C.J.in the Nuclear Tests cases, where it
emphasized that:

[T]he Court possesses an inherent jurisdiction enabling it to take such action as may be
required, on the one hand, to ensure that the exercise of its jurisdiction over the merits, if
and when established, shall not be frustrated, and on the other, to provide for the orderly
settlement of all matters in dispute, to ensure the observance of the “inherent limitations
on the exercise of the judicial function” of the Court, and to “maintain its judicial
character” ... Such inherent jurisdiction, on the basis of which the Court is fully empowered
to make whatever findings may be necessary for the purposes just indicated, derives from
the mere existence of the Court as a judicial organ established by the consent of States,
and is conferred upon it in order that its basic judicial functions may be safeguarded. (167)

The theory of “inherent powers” of courts and tribunals is a very powerful device, as such
powers are deemed to exist regardless of their textual basis, and therefore it isto be
distinguished from the theory of “implied powers,” (168) while relying on the same
functional approach. Considering their inherent nature, these powers are frequently
expressly stated in the constitutive charter of the tribunal or court, which is also a method
for controlling their application in practice. (169) However, the main advantage of this
theory lies in its potential neutralization of the rules under which the tribunal or court
proceeds. Although “inherent powers” may not contradict the powers expressed in the
constitutive instruments, it has been argued that they may not only complete the legal
instruments governing the procedure of the tribunal or court, but also extensively interpret
them in order for the tribunal to enjoy the maximum of latitude while exercising its
functions. (170) An illustration of this interplay between “inherent powers” and procedural
instruments may be found in the practice of the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal, which
functions under the UNCITRAL Rules. Indeed, several of its decisions underline the
“inherent power” of the tribunal to order interim measures (171) regardless of the explicit
provisions of Article 26. (172) This had no impact on the binding nature of such measures,

« but permitted the expansion ratione materiae of the scope of the tribunal's interim

oe measure powers @ beyond those in Article 26, textually limited to the su bject matter of

~ the dispute, in order to protect the effectiveness of the tribunal's jurisdiction and its

authority. (173)

It is difficult, however, to determine to what extent a court or tribunal may implement the
“inherent powers” theory so as to act contra legem and blatantly contradict its constituent
instruments. For some scholars, one of the limits of the theory lies in the explicit
limitations included in the constituent instruments of the court or tribunal, the so-called
“clause contraire.” (174) For another minority view, some of these judicial powers “are
intrinsic in the nature of the tribunal and may not be denied ... even through an express
provision.” (175) While it is seems excessive to follow the latter view, a distinction must be
drawn, in our opinion, between an explicit restrictive limitation to the tribunal's power
and a simple provision stating how the tribunal or court is deemed to proceed while
dealing with a certain issue.

To illustrate the first category, it is possible to mention Article 1134 of NAFTA providing that
“[a] Tribunal may not order attachment or enjoin the application of the measure alleged to
constitute a breach referred to in Article 1116 or 1117.” The arbitral tribunal in Pope &
Talbot stated that Article 1134 “does not confer jurisdiction on the Tribunal to enjoin the
application of a measure ... the Tribunal takes the view that it lacks power to grant such
relief.” (176)

It is our view that the legal framework for the granting of interim measures in the ICSID
Convention system falls within the second category. Article 47 of the Convention provides
that “[e]xcept as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the
circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which should be taken to
preserve the respective rights of either party.” Three arguments can be advanced to
demonstrate that Article 47 cannot constitute a clause contraire. First, the presence of the
expression “[e]xcept as the parties otherwise agree” leaves room for binding provisional

11
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
measures through the lex arbitralis specialis, thereby meaning that Article 47 does not
impose a mandatory limitation regarding the binding character of provisional measures.
Secondly, and relying also on the latter statement, Article 47 does not prohibit explicitly
the tribunal's power to “order” interim measures. Thirdly, and completing these two
arguments, the legislative history of the Convention shows that if there is strong evidence
that the term “recommend” was chosen over “prescribe,” the travaux préparatoires also
highlight that negotiating states made this choice for practical reasons in order to avoid
the question of the enforceability of interim measures before domestic courts, (177) and
therefore did not prevent consideration of the binding nature of such measures within the

. sole sphere of arbitral proceedings.

P 799
P 800

~ There are therefore strong arguments that the theory of “inherent powers” of courts and
tribunals can potentially justify the binding nature of interim protective measures
adopted by ICSID arbitral tribunals. (178) The same conclusion applies for the principle not
to “aggravate or extend the dispute.” An explicit reference to this principle or theory in
ICSID decisions, and an explanation as to how they may overarch the provisions of Article
47, would have beena preferable argument and legal basis compared with the conclusions
referred to above underlying the similarities between the I.C.J. Statute and the ICSID
Convention and concluding that “recommend” means “order.” Besides, and considering
that the legal basis for the recognition of the binding nature is to be found outside the
scope of the Convention, ICSID tribunals have to expressly specify the mandatory nature of
such measures. In our view, the recent decisions only “recommending” interim measures on
the basis of Article 47 (179) cannot be interpreted de plano as “orders.” (180)

2 Consequences of Non-Compliance with Interim Measures

Carrying out a judicial function, arbitrators have therefore the authority to adopt binding
interim measures. Although, most of the time, parties spontaneously comply with them,
(181) the question of the consequences of non-compliance are not of a purely theoretical
nature. Considering that arbitrators lack coercive powers, (182) the issue of their
implementation stays mainly within the sole framework of the arbitration and it is
therefore necessary to highlight the procedural and substantive consequences of non-
compliance with binding interim measures.

a Procedural consequence: Drawing adverse inferences

The drafting history of the ICSID Convention suggests that, although there was a lack of
consensus as to mentioning the effect or the possibility of damages or penalties for non-
compliance, negotiating parties considered that “naturally the Tribunal would normally
have to take account of this fact [non-compliance] when it came to make its award.” (183)
@ Therefore, and absent “the power to penalize parties,” (184) arbitral tribunals
nevertheless have the possibility to draw adverse inferences from non-compliance,
notably on the issues involving the production of evidence. (185)

rs
P 800
P 801
vW

In Agip v. Congo, the arbitral tribunal explicitly indicated that it drew such inferences from
the uncooperative behavior of the Government of Congo. While examining the “grievances
invoked] by Agip and ... the assessment of, and provision of reparation for the damage
caused to it,” the tribunal noted that it did not “lose sight of the facts ... (c) that the
Government did not comply with the decision of the Tribunal ... as to the measures of
preservation and as a consequence Agip was unable to have access to a certain number of
documents which could have assisted it in presenting its case.” (186)

The possibility to draw adverse inferences from non-production of evidence is not limited
to decisions of arbitral tribunals in the form of interim measures, but exists more explicitly
as part of the arbitral tribunal's decisions based on its general power to summon evidence.
Also, Article 34(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides that “[t]he parties shall cooperate
with the Tribunal in the production of the evidence” and adds that the tribunal “shall take
formal note of the failure of a party to comply with its obligations under this paragraph
and of any reasons given for such failure.” As a power not specifically provided for non-
compliance with interim measures, the drawing of adverse inferences can be considered
one of the tribunal's “inherent powers” in relation to its judicial functions of the
administration of evidence and determination of the truth. Such a power exists, therefore,
inthe context of arbitrations other than those conducted under the ICSID Convention. (187)

It is worth mentioning that arbitral practice has defined some criteria and procedural
principles circumscribing the ability of tribunals to draw adverse inferences in the context
of the production of evidentiary documents: the party requesting adverse inferences must
establish that the evidence sought is accessible for the requested party; it must produce
all evidence in its possession permitting the corroboration of the inference sought and, at
least, prima facie evidence of its claim or defense; there should be a reasonable and
consistent link between the evidence sought and the facts in dispute; and the arbitral
tribunal should afford the requested party sufficient due process considerations. (188)

The ability of arbitral tribunals to draw adverse inferences constitutes a powerful device
for arbitral tribunals to ensure a high level of compliance with their interim protective
* measures. Arbitrators also have the possibility to indicate to parties what inferences they

P 801 . . . .
a may draw from a failure to comply, (189) thereby implementing a sort of psychological @

12
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
penalty. (190) Drawing adverse inferences is, however, mainly restricted to matters related
to production and preservation of evidence.

b Substantive consequence: Compensation for the aggravation of harm

There are a few examples of non-compliance with interim measures in investment
arbitration having substantive consequences. Some theoretical, although essential,
considerations must be pointed out.

It has been suggested in the context of international commercial arbitration that
arbitrators have the authority to grant damages for non-compliance with interim measures
implied from their power to order them. (191) Likewise, some commentators found in the
jurisprudence of the I.C.J., notably in the Fisheries Jurisdiction case, (192) that “a violation of
an interim measure would carry with it the responsibility of reparation.” (193) Although
international tribunals such as the I.C.J. usually make a note of non-compliance with
interim measures in decisions on the merits, and even suggest that a non-compliance
amounts per se to the violation of the international obligation, (194) binding interim
measures do not create, in our view, new and specific subjective rights to their beneficiary
that are distinct from those resulting from its cause of action. (195) The only power of
tribunals in this respect is therefore to grant compensation for the aggravation of the harm
suffered, if any, resulting from non-compliance with these measures. For instance, in the
practice of the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal, non-compliance with an interim
measure granted by the arbitral tribunal to stay parallel litigation in domestic courts
resulted in the tribunal's final award declaring “without legal effect” the final decision
adopted by domestic courts. (196) No additional responsibility was recognized above the
legal neutralization of negative consequences resulting from non-compliance.

p 802 Of course, considering the restrictive and exceptional substantive conditions under which
—peo2 arbitral tribunals are entitled to adopt interim protective measures, non-compliance @
~ with such measures is likely to result in the aggravation of the harm suffered by the

requesting party. However, non-compliance does not imply ipso jure the responsibility of
the recalcitrant party. Given the cautious but anticipatory and prospective assessment of
one of the parties’ behavior in which the granting of provisional measures lies, as well as
the potential doubts on the jurisdiction of the tribunal, (197) arbitrators' determinations
are based on hypotheses and it would seem excessive to attach a responsibility to non-
compliance regardless of whether or not it has resulted in an additional prejudice.

Having established the extent to which arbitral tribunals adjudicating investment disputes
have the power to grant interim measures, it is now necessary to determine the
substantive aspects of their implementation.

lll Substantive Aspects of Interim Protective Measures

In practice, a large range of different interim measures have so far been granted by
arbitral tribunals. They are related to procedural issues such as the production (198) and
preservation (199) of evidence; the confidentiality of proceedings; (200) the interruption of
parallel proceedings in domestic courts (201) orin another arbitral tribunal; (202) to
P 803 specific performance such as a suspension of payments, (203) a ban on the transfer of funds
pao, outside the host state (204) or on @ the termination of contracts; (205) to an interdiction of
~ the seizing or the obtaining of a lien on assets; (206) the maintenance of ordinary business
operations; (207) or, more broadly, a direction not to aggravate the dispute; (208) financial
guarantees regarding the costs of arbitration; or to the satisfaction of the award. (209) This
diversity calls, however, for a more precise analysis of the scope of arbitral tribunals’
interim powers and the distinct types of interim measures which should be available
under this label, before dealing with the very restrictive substantive conditions under
which interim measures may be granted.

A Scope of arbitral tribunals’ interim protection power

As highlighted above, the power to grant interim measures is, in certain cases, shared
between arbitral tribunals and domestic courts. While procedural considerations have
shown a ratione temporis dimension, (210) it should not obscure the potential ratione
materiae allocation of measures between the two, particularly in ICSID Convention
arbitration. This is a necessary preliminary step to distinguish the place of interim
protective power among the range of measures arbitral tribunals have the authority to
adopt.

1 Ratione Materiae Allocation of Interim Protective Measures between Arbitral Tribunals
and Domestic Courts

a De facto ratione materiae allocation in non-ICSID Convention arbitration

As mentioned above, the main institutional and ad hoc arbitration rules used in
international investment arbitration empower both arbitrators and domestic courts to
adopt interim measures. Considering the still modest mechanisms for the early granting of
interim relief before the appointment of the tribunal, (211) domestic courts play a greater
role at the pre-arbitral stage, while arbitral tribunals regain the upper hand at the
beginning of their proceedings. (212)

Danh

13
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
rout

P 805
vv

Besides this ratione temporis distribution, there is no explicit ratione materiae allocation of
interim measures in arbitration rules between arbitral tribunals and domestic courts. One
may point to the distinction in the UNCITRAL Rules between the power of an arbitral
tribunal to take “any interim measures... in respect of the subject-matter of the dispute”
(213) and the broader reference to “[a] request for interim measures. ... to a judicial
authority,” (214) but these textual differences are too minor to infer a de jure allocation.
Such allocation, if any, lies therefore in the practical application of interim measures in
arbitration, and may be highlighted by interim measures seeking guarantee in the
expectation of the future enforcement of the award.

Apart from the specific situation that “arbitrators do not have power ... [to] grant
attachments or freezing orders that intrinsically require the use of the court's coercive
powers,” (215) the granting of a pre-award security is not prohibited by any of the
arbitration rules mentioned, and it is sometimes explicitly permitted. (216) The relevant
question is as to the overall efficiency of requesting such security before the arbitral
tribunal. It is obvious that such measures, which are expected to be granted spontaneously
in order to prevent the dispersion of assets, are not likely to fulfill this objective if they are
granted by an arbitrator, because their enforcement before domestic courts will still be
needed if a party is reluctant to provide security. This is, of course, with all the uncertainty
weighing on the enforceability of interim protective measures already mentioned.

This suggests a form of natural allocation between arbitral tribunal and domestic courts,
the former being entitled to order interim measures in relation to the dispute, the latter
being the more efficient forum to provide a guarantee of the enforcement of the future
award. This de facto “subsidiarity” governing in practice the relationship between these
two forums highlights a distinction, which inherently exists in ICSID Convention arbitration,
between interim measures in relation to the dispute, and protecting the “rights” of parties
and those in relation to the execution of the award, and protecting the “interests” of
parties.

b Inherent ratione materiae allocation in ICSID Convention arbitration

Asa “self-contained” regime, ICSID arbitration is disconnected from domestic courts and,
unless provided in the lex arbitralis specialis, ICSID tribunals have a monopoly in the
adoption of interim measures. In addition, instruments governing the arbitration do not
impose ratione materiae limitations on a tribunal's interim relief powers. Indeed,
according to Article 47 of ICSID Convention, the tribunal may adopt “any provisional
measures.” In Casado, the tribunal pointed out that “the drafters ... decided not to delimit
@ the range of possible measures, given the infinite variety of situations in which such
measures Can justifiably be invoked.” (217)

P 805
P 806
vv

This wide power can, however, be restricted by the lex arbitralis specialis. Article 39(6) of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules allows the parties to request “judicial or other authority to
order provisional measures, prior to or after the institution of the proceeding,” provided
sucha possibility is included within their agreement. This is notably the case of NAFTA
which, when applied in connection with the ICSID Convention, breaches arbitral tribunals’
monopoly to adopt interim measures (218) and, more importantly, removes their authority
to “order attachment or enjoin the application of the measure alleged to constitute a
breach.” (219) Notably, this restriction was taken into account in Pope & Talbot where the
arbitral tribunal stated that “it lacks power to grant such relief.” (220)

It is unclear whether or not ICSID tribunals and domestic courts enjoy exactly the same
interim powers when recourse to courts has been planned by parties. Whereas Article 39(1)
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules refers to “provisional measures for the preservation of its
rights,” Article 39(6) delimiting domestic courts' authority speaks of “provisional measures
... for the preservation of their respective rights and interests.” This additional reference to
“interests” seems to indicate a distinction between measures related to the dispute and
deemed to preserve the “rights” of parties, and measures related to the execution of the
award and deemed to preserve the “interests” of parties. Does it mean that, in any case,
with or without specific agreement of parties, ICSID tribunals lack the authority to order

interim measures for the protection of parties’ “interests”?

Some commentators have indeed suggested that a fundamental distinction exists within
the category of interim measures between conservatory measures directly in relation to
the execution of the award, and other interim measures, such as orders of production or
preservation of evidence, or for specific performance. (221) It has been argued that “in the
spirit of the Convention,” the latter are the exclusive realm of arbitral tribunals whereas
the former should be the province of domestic courts. (222) Inthe wake of this discussion,
an arguably appealing, but somehow questionable, argument could be made.

First, while Article 39(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules recognizes the possibility to request
interim measures before arbitral tribunals for the protection of “rights,” and Article 39(6)
allows the request of interim measures for the protection of “rights and interests” provided
there is an agreement, these provisions could be interpreted as implicitly recognizing the
power of domestic courts to permanently protect “interests” regardless of an agreement of
the parties to do so. In addition, if domestic courts have under the @ ICSID Convention the
obligation, and therefore the power, to enforce ICSID awards, they should consequently

rs
P 806
P 807
vv

14
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
have the parallel power to secure the enforcement of a future award. Such an
interpretation (223) would reflect a kind of inherent and natural allocation of interim
measures between the arbitral tribunal and domestic courts, distinguishing two distinct
legal spheres: the dispute and the award.

In practice, ICSID tribunals have always abstained from granting pre-award security, such
as, for instance, cautio judicatum solvi. (224) The justification of arbitral tribunals on this
issue seems, however, inconsistent. In Atlantic Triton v. Guinea, the arbitral tribunal refused
the parties' request but admitted that “such measures would clearly be within its mandate
under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention.” (225) On the contrary, while recognizing “the very
broad and varied nature of the possible provisional measures available within the ICSID
regime,” (226) the tribunal in Casado v. Chile pointed out that “the absence of any text on
the guaranteeing of the payment of costs ... seems to entail a certain presumption that
such a measure is not authorized or included.” (227) If the Casado tribunal attempted to
reconcile this position with the Atlantic Triton ruling considering this measure admissible
“in certain circumstances” (228) but not as “an ordinary and general measure,” (229) this
case demonstrated how uncomfortable ICSID tribunals are in dealing with such requests,
preferring to leave the unrewarding work to domestic courts. In Tanesco v. IPTL, the
tribunal considered ina much more clear-cut opinion that “there is some precedent for
the view that conservatory or provisional measures under Rule 39 should not be
recommended in order, in effect, to give security for the claim.” (230) The de facto
unavailability of pre-award security tends to confirm the unstated aforementioned

. allocation of interim powers between arbitral tribunals and domestic courts. (231)

P 807
P 808
~ The question as to whether such allocation is deeply rooted in the ICSID Convention and

therefore permits pre-award security before domestic courts, absent explicit choice of
parties in accordance with Article 39(6), is somehow much more debatable. This, of course,
would depend on the attitude of domestic courts regarding such requests and arbitral
tribunals’ inclination potentially to request parties to stay domestic proceedings. The
latter parameter is, however, theoretical as pre-award securities are typically sought
before the appointment of the arbitral tribunal. The former may be illustrated in the
recent and still pending ICSID case, ETI v. Bolivia. (232)

ETI, a Dutch corporation holding shares in Entel since the privatization of this Bolivian
telecommunications company in 1995, initiated arbitral proceedings against Bolivia
following the renationalization of this entity by filing a request with the ICSID Secretary
General in October 2007. The arbitral tribunal was then constituted in October 2008. Just
after the Bolivian police took control of Entel's offices on May 1, 2008, ETI obtained an ex
parte order on May 5, 2008 ina New York federal district court denying its motion to attach
Bolivia's property. However, its application with respect to Entel's property located in New
York resulted eventually in a U.S.$36 million attachment. (233) On July 30, 2008, ETI's
motion to confirm the attachment was denied and the former ex parte order was vacated.
(234) At the same time, ETI, on May 7, 2008, brought a similar action before the English
courts in order to prevent the risk of dissipation of Bolivia's and Entel's assets located in
London. Likewise, freezing orders that were sought by ETI were eventually set aside by the
Court of Appeal on July 28, 2008. (235)

If the New York proceedings are not very instructive as to the aforementioned issue, (236)
the British decision contains several developments on the impact of Article 39(6) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules in domestic courts. (237) Although “[p]rovisional relief by a national
court pending any decision by the tribunal once constituted ... supports rather than
undermines an ICSID arbitration,” (238) the Court of Appeal underlined “the effect of Rule
39(6) ... that provisional measures may be sought only from the ICSID tribunal itself, and
not from national courts, unless the parties agree otherwise.” (239) The Court circumvented
the argument that the ICSID Convention is not incorporated in U.K. lawand @ relied onthe
consent of parties to the arbitration under the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules,
concluding that:

P 808
P 809
vv

Although there may be exceptional circumstances which might justify a national court in
disregarding the agreement of the parties, in my judgment that agreement pursuant to the
Convention and the Rules would of itself normally make an interim order... inexpedient,
and also make it unnecessary to consider all the other circumstances. (240)

English courts have therefore, admittedly indirectly, implemented the provisions of Article
39(6) and recognized their unavailability for pre-award security absent agreement of the
parties. In addition, it would be an interesting question for the ICSID arbitral tribunal to
consider if such a request for interim measures limits its jurisdiction in the future. This
decision has also highlighted how interim measures sought in domestic courts can be
exploited to force the most advantageous settlement of the case. As such, the English Court
of Appeal introduced its decision by pointing out that “[i]t concerns an attempt by ETI to
use national courts to secure its position in an international arbitration arising out of the
nationalisation of its interests in Bolivia.” (241)

Such exploitation has also been underlined in the case involving Exxon Mobil against
Petroleos de Venezuela, a Venezuelan state-owned oil company. Within the framework of
the initiation of an ICC arbitration, Mobil sought and obtained from the English courts a
“freezing injunction” with an unprecedented value up to U.S.$12 billion in support of a

15
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
potential arbitral award. (242) The order was eventually lifted more than one month later.
(243) Such requests may have harmful effects for those under the injunctions. Indeed, these
corporations lose the free disposal of their assets, thereby significantly disturbing their
economic activity. Admittedly, those interim measures are in practice less requested to
secure the execution of the award than to increase the bargaining power of the claimant
seeking the most favorable settlement of its case. It has been argued that what may
constitute “the nuclear weapon in the litigation armoury ... had fallen into the wrong
hands.” (244) Such excessive requests enhance the risk of escalation of the dispute and
undermine, more than assist, the arbitration. Venezuelan officials described Mobil's
initiatives as a form of “judicial” and “legal terrorism.” (245)

Such measures are all the more difficult to control when they originate from domestic
courts that may have different standards in dealing with interim measures in aid of
arbitration. They may not only undermine the dispute itself, they can also more broadly
compromise or even endanger the sustainability of, and the confidence in, international
investment dispute resolution mechanisms. It is not a coincidence that we have witnessed
@ in recent years a growing mistrust, manifesting itself in the withdrawal of some countries
from international investment arbitration mechanisms, notably from ICSID. (246) Ironically,
it appears that the ICSID system is certainly more protective of sovereign interests, since
domestic courts' interim measures such as pre-award guarantees may only be ordered if
the state expressly consented, whereas judicial interim power is the default rule in other
arbitration mechanisms.

P 809
P 810
vv

Beyond these risks weighing on arbitration mechanisms, it has been shown that, when
granting interim relief, arbitral tribunals focus mainly on the preservation of parties' rights
and either tend to evade the issue of the award's future enforcement, or are not
considered as a natural forum to seek such relief. This leads us to try to determine if,
among all measures taken by arbitral tribunals and regardless of their label, there isa
genuine category of arbitral interim protective measures.

2 Allocation of Interim Protective Measures within Arbitral Tribunals' Powers

Before considering whether a category of genuine interim protective measures exists, it
seems necessary to minimize the differences in the wording of arbitration rules. For
instance, both the ICSID Arbitration Rules and Additional Facility Rules refer to the
“measures for the preservation of its [a party's] rights,” (247) whereas the UNCITRAL Rules
mention “measures... in respect of the subject-matter of the dispute.” (248) In Sergei
Paushok v. Mongolia, the tribunal considered that the UNCITRAL Rules applicable in this
arbitration left “wider discretion to the Tribunal in the awarding of provisional measures.”
(249) In our view, these dissimilarities are ultimately insignificant.

Indeed, none of these arbitration rules contains an explicit clause contraire suggesting that
certain arbitral interim measures are expressly prohibited. Taking into account the
inherent powers of every tribunal, arbitrators enjoy a great discretion in practice. In
Casado v. Chile, taking into account the fact that “[t]he drafters of the ICSID Convention in
effect decided not to delimit the range of possible measures, given the infinite variety of
situations in which such measures can justifiably be invoked” (250) and that the provisions
of Article 47 of the Convention and 39 of the Arbitration Rules “contain no indication or
exact statement,” (251) the arbitral tribunal @ recognized that interim measures “can be
extremely diverse and are left to the appreciation of each Arbitral Tribunal.” (252)

P 810
P 811
vv

Considering this broad discretion, arbitral tribunals usually granted, or stated they had the
power to grant, the same kinds of interim measures (subject to the conditions mentioned
below and to the extent they have a connection with the dispute), (253) such as the
preservation of evidence, (254) order of specific performance (255) or a stay of proceedings
in domestic courts. (256) Within this framework, a specific issue as to the scope of arbitral
interim powers deserves to be mentioned.

It is noteworthy that arbitral tribunals have clearly mentioned that the scope of interim
measures is distinct from the general scope of the tribunals' administrative powers. This
has been highlighted in Biwater v. Tanzania, where the claimant's request for production of
documents was labeled as “interim” under Article 47 although it fell within the scope of
Article 43 of the ICSID Convention which provides that “the Tribunal may, if it deems it
necessary at any stage of the proceedings, call upon the parties to produce documents or
other evidence.” The arbitral tribunal refused this request based on Article 47 since
“production is not usually considered within the ambit of such interim relief,” (257) and
made it clear that “Article 47 is designed to ensure that the Arbitral Tribunal can properly
discharge its mandate, whilst Article 43 is one element ina range of provisions that
structures how the mandate is to be discharged.” (258)

Interim protective measures therefore belong to a category that cannot overlap other
general administrative powers of the tribunal to conduct the proceedings. Their main
specificity lies in the very restrictive conditions under which they are granted.

B Conditions for the granting of interim protective measures

Arbitration rules are usually very broadly drafted and do not provide strong guidance to
the arbitrators as to when interim measures may be granted. For instance, the ICSID Rules

P 811 . . . .
refer both to the “preservation” of a party's rights and the “circumstances” that @ require

P 812

16
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
such measures, (259) whereas the UNCITRAL Rules simply mention measures that the
arbitral tribunal “deems necessary in respect of the subject-matter of the dispute.” (260) In
practice, arbitral tribunals relying on the jurisprudence of other tribunals have construed
and developed a common set of requirements that need to be met in order to grant an
interim protective measure. This is true regardless of their textual bases in arbitration
rules. In Sergei Paushok v. Mongolia, the arbitral tribunal deciding on the interim measures
(substantially relying on the previous work of an author (261) ) pointed out that:

It is internationally recognized that five standards have to be met before a tribunal will
issue an order in support of interim measures. ... (1) prima facie jurisdiction, (2) prima facie
establishment of the case, (3) urgency, (4) imminent danger of serious prejudice (necessity)
and (5) proportionality. (262)

These sometimes overlapping conditions may, however, be considered separately as two
layers of conditions distinct in nature. First, because the fundamental function of interim
measures is to protect the rights of parties pending arbitration, the tribunal needs to
assess the “protectability” of these rights, that is to say it needs to carry out an overall
assessment of the claim, inevitably conducted prima facie considering the necessity to
decide promptly. Secondly, tribunals must assess how the circumstances may affect a
party's right and determine whether or not such circumstances require an appropriate
interim protection pending the arbitration.

1 Prima Facie Assessment of the Claim: The “Protectability” of Rights

Requests for interim measures can be filed at any stage of the proceedings, therefore
“before the Tribunal has been able to rule on all the objections to its jurisdiction or on the
admissibility of the claim on the merits.” (263) In this situation, arbitrators need to find a
right balance between two opposite risks: imposing a measure on a party and eventually
finding that they lack the jurisdiction to do so, or waiting for a preliminary ruling on
jurisdiction but taking the risk of jeopardizing the final decision. (264) Tribunals have
therefore construed a two-prong test assessing the prima facie jurisdiction of the tribunal
. to hear the claim and the prima facie admissibility of the case.

P 812

P 813

a Prima facie Jurisdiction

The necessity of prima facie jurisdiction to order interim measures has been firmly
established by the I.C.J. since the Icelandic Fisheries cases, where it found sufficient a
“provision in an instrument emanating from both Parties to the dispute [appearing], prima
facie, to afford a possible basis on which the jurisdiction of the Court might be founded.”
(265) This requirement, reaffirmed by the I.C.J. in Military and Paramilitary Activities in and
Against Nicaragua, (266) has since been adopted by the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal,
(267) ICSID, (268) and UNCITRAL (269) tribunals, and more broadly in the context of
international commercial arbitration. (270)

This prima facie requirement is not difficult to meet in investment arbitrations, as a clear
basis for jurisdiction is likely to be found in investment treaties or arbitration agreements.
(271) The sole presence of one of these instruments apparently applicable between the
claimant and the respondent, and referring to the arbitration mechanism in question,
constitutes a sufficient prima facie basis. The arbitral tribunal disregards at this stage
more complex issues, such as the requirement of a prior negotiation period, (272) that will
be considered exhaustively at the jurisdictional phase of the proceedings. It must be
stressed that the recognition of prima facie jurisdiction by the arbitral tribunal will not
4 prejudge the final determination of the tribunal on its jurisdiction. (273)
P 813
P 814
~ Inthe ICSID system, the establishment of this prima facie jurisdiction can be facilitated by
the Secretary-General's screening test at the registration of the request. Indeed, the ICSID
Convention provides that the Secretary-General may refuse to register the request if “he
finds, on the basis of the information contained in the request, that the dispute is
manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Centre.” (274) This purely administrative
Secretary-General's decision cannot bind ipso jure the future determination of the tribunal
on its prima facie jurisdiction (275) but, in practice, “it provides a useful basis for its power
to recommend provisional measures.” (276)

b Prima facie case (fumus boni juris)

According to one author, the “basic requirement” of a prima facie establishment of the
case “is to satisfy the tribunal that the moving party has, with reasonable probability a
case or, alternatively, to determine that the claim is not frivolous or vexatious.” (277) This
criterion, also known as fumus boni juris, is one of the few where international arbitral
tribunals have departed from the case law of the I.C.)., which does not take this condition
into consideration. (278)

Arbitral decisions do not contain much guidance on this principle. (279) The recent
decision in Sergei Paushok v. Mongolia seems to establish no more than an obviousness
test by considering that “[a]t this stage, the Tribunal need not go beyond whether a
reasonable case has been made which, if the facts alleged are proven, might possibly lead

17
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
the Tribunal to the conclusion that an award could be made in favor of Claimants.” (280)
Therefore, and contrary to domestic courts, the tribunal does not have to assess the
possibility of success on the underlying merits when it grants interim measures. (281)
Besides, it underlines that implementing a stricter test “would require the Tribunal to
proceed to a determination of the facts and, in practice, to a hearing on the merits of the
case, a lengthy and complicated process which would defeat the very purpose of interim
measures.” (282)

p B14 Actually, this type of judicial review is of the same slight intensity as the one required to
—peis_ Pass the filter of preliminary objections in the ICSID arbitration mechanism. Indeed, @
~ according to Article 41(6) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the arbitral tribunal may render an

award even if it considers “claims are manifestly without legal merit.” (283) At this specific
stage, the tribunal must indeed decide the issue of jurisdiction but has only to consider
prima facie the mere acceptability of the claim (albeit the intensity of conclusiveness
required may vary in practice depending on common law and civil law approaches) (284)
so as to refer to fumus boni juris as well as fumus non mali juris. (285) Consequently,
because this prima facie test is implemented at the preliminary objections or interim
measures stages the tribunal should not prejudge the decision on the merits. (286)

Having found a potential basis for jurisdiction and a reasonable substantive claim, the
arbitral tribunal finishes this prima facie assessment of the claim conducted regardless of
the contents of the request for interim measures, and switches its focus to the substantive
conditions under which such measures may be granted.

2 Substantive Conditions as to Interim Protection

Several ICSID and UNCITRAL tribunals pointed out that interim measures are
“extraordinary” and should not be granted “lightly.” (287) Despite a certain convergence
regarding the functions these measures pursue, the tribunals' arguments sometimes lack
clarity and consistency as to the substantive conditions under which interim protection
may be granted. A distinction is to be made between the exceptional conditions
determining the necessity for the arbitral tribunal to protect the parties' rights pending
arbitration and the conditions that the measures sought must satisfy in relation to the
. necessity of protection.
P 815
P 817

a Necessity to protect the parties' rights pending arbitration

Arbitration rules do not provide much guidance as to the assessment of the necessity to
protect parties' rights during the course of arbitration. (288) In our view, such assessment
should follow three logical steps: (i) it is first necessary to underline the characteristics of
the rights to be protected, then (ii) to determine the circumstances endangering the
protection of these rights, and, finally, (iii) to identify the circumstances justifying an early
protection. These three conditions are, of course, cumulative. (289)

(i) Conditions as to the rights to be protected (rights entitled to protection). As pointed out by
one author, the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules “do not specify which of the parties'
rights might deserve protection by way of provisional measures.” (290) Other arbitration
rules are equally silent on this issue. A study of arbitral precedents and commentaries
suggest that two conditions must be fulfilled: first, rights to be protected must reasonably
exist and, secondly, they must be connected to the main claim.

It is not clear if the test related to the parties' rights to be protected overlaps the
condition of the prima facie establishment of the case. In Maffezini v. Spain, the tribunal
laconically stated “that such rights must exist at the time of the request, must not be
hypothetical, nor are ones to be created in the future.” (291) This position has been
moderated by subsequent decisions, and notably in Casado v. Chile which considered that
the aforementioned Maffezini decision “contains ... some statements that may be
susceptible to misunderstanding.” (292) Underlining that “[i]t is clearly not a question for
the Tribunal of prejudging in any way ... its eventual decision on the substance,” (293) the
decision pointed out that:

It [the tribunal] must therefore reason, at this preliminary stage of the arbitration process,
on the basis not of “assumptions” but of “hypotheses,” in particular that by which it may
come to recognize its own jurisdiction on the substance of the case, and in such a case, the
hypothesis whereby the rights that the decision may recognize for one or the other of the
parties in question could be placed in danger or compromised by the absence of
provisional measures. (294)

This view has been confirmed and clarified in OPC v. Ecuador, where the arbitral tribunal
stressed that “the right to be preserved only has to be asserted asa theoretically existing
right, as opposed to proven to exist in fact” (295) and that the claimant “need only @ show
that they allege the kind of claims that—if ultimately proven—would entitle claimants to
substantial relief.” (296) The prima facie test seems therefore to be sufficient in order to
recognize the possibility to protect rights that are included in the claim, a situation that is
involved in most of the requests for interim measures.

P 817
P 818
vv

It is nonetheless necessary to consider the protection of rights other than those raised by
the claimant in its substantive claim. The standard adopted by the I.C.J. lies in the

18
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
existence of a strict relationship between the rights to be protected and the main claim.
(297) Arbitral tribunals have relied on this standard, such as in Plama v. Bulgaria, where
arbitrators considered that “the rights to be preserved by provisional measures are
circumscribed by the requesting party's claims and requests for relief ... [and] must be
related to the specific disputes in arbitration.” (298) This standard enables tribunals to
extend their interim power and thereby take into consideration substantive as well
procedural rights having a connection with the rights at stake, such as, for the latter
category, the preservation of evidence, (299) but interim protection cannot be granted so
as to protect the rights of third parties such as subsidiaries. (300) To corroborate the
previous analysis on the allocation of interim power between arbitral tribunals and
domestic courts, the lack of relationship between the frustration of the award and the
main claim could be viewed as one of the reasons why arbitral tribunals have been
reluctant to grant pre-award security. This is particularly so considering that the protection
request focuses mainly on the outcome of the merits rather than the rights eventually to be
recognized by the tribunal. (301)

(ii) Circumstances justifying protection (causality and necessity). The tribunal must not only
recognize that a certain party's right included in or related to the main claim is at stake,
but must also demonstrate that circumstances are likely to cause a violation or an
aggravation of the violation of rights entitled to protection. The tribunal must therefore
carry out a prospective analysis, requiring “a degree of speculation,” (302) in order to
determine if certain circumstances are, first, likely to occur in the future and, secondly,
likely to affect the rights deserving protection. If the first part of the test is purely factual,
the second is subject to debate.

International courts and arbitral tribunals have often underlined the necessity to
demonstrate an “irreparable harm” or “irreparable prejudice.” (303) However, as pointed
out by one author, “the terms of ‘grave’ or ‘substantive’ might be more appropriate than
‘irreparable.’” (304) Indeed, the idea underlying the term “irreparable” suggests that the
rights deserving protection would not even be compensable in case of violation. It is
P 818 certain that some kinds of reparations are more adequate than others, but all harm could
—pajg @ be considered as compensable eventually. Additionally, the tribunal pointed out in
~ Sergei Paushok v. Mongolia that “[t]he possibility of monetary compensation does not

necessarily eliminate the possible need for interim measures.” (305) Therefore, as
underlined in Biwater v. Tanzania, the standard is met when there “exists a sufficient risk of
harm or prejudice, as well as aggravation, in this case to warrant some form of control.”
(306)

Some tribunals have applied a stricter test when the Claimants' posture consisted
essentially in monetary damages. In Plama v. Bulgaria, the tribunal pointed out that “harm
is not irreparable if it can be compensated for by damages, which is the case in the
present arbitration and which, moreover, is the only remedy claimant seeks.” (307)
Likewise, in OPC v. Ecuador, the arbitral tribunal considered that interim relief was not
available, as the claimant's request “is not to avoid aggravation of the dispute per se, but
rather aggravation of the monetary damages resulting from an already existing dispute.”
(308)

In our view, these positions are questionable. While it seems inappropriate to grant
monetary damages reflecting the anticipated aggravation of the dispute as an interim
protection, reparation in international investment disputes often results in monetary
compensation, and it should not prevent the granting of measures, such as specific
performance, deemed to lessen the final amount of damages. The arguments of the
tribunals in Plama and OPC should have been placed on the ground of the availability of
the measure rather than denying that the circumstances were likely to cause an
aggravation of the prejudice.

(iii) Circumstances justifying the interim protection (urgency). The risk of prejudice to parties’
rights deserving protection has not only to be substantive, grave, or sufficient, it has also to
be imminent. (309) Urgency is indeed the decisive factor justifying an upheaval of the
arbitration process and “acceleration of these requests” (310) in order to decide them
promptly. (311)

Urgency is, of course, a factual determination and arbitral tribunals enjoy great latitude
and “broad discretion” (312) while considering these criterion. Arbitral decisions tend to
converge toward an objective factual analysis and one tribunal stated “the standard to be
applied is one of reasonableness.” (313) The test is therefore similar to the one applied by
the |.C.J. according to which “there is urgency in the sense that action prejudicial to @ the
rights of either party is likely to be taken before such final decision is given.” (314) A certain
degree of certainty or likelihood is therefore expected by arbitrators, such as in OPC v.
Ecuador, where the tribunal rejected the request since in its view “the claimants are
seeking a provisional measure in order to prevent an action which they are not even sure is
being planned.” (315)

ro
P 818
P 819
vv

b Appropriateness of the protective measure sought

Since it has been established that an imminent danger is likely to substantially prejudice
parties’ rights, arbitral tribunals are entitled to adopt an interim measure of protection.
However, their leeway in this field is limited in two ways: the measure planned must be
available and then proportional, reflecting the principles of limitations guiding the

19
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
restitution of state responsibility in international law.

(i) Availability of the measure. Except in the very specific cases where the measure sought is
expressly prohibited by the lex arbitralis specialis, (316) the scope of measures available
for arbitrators is limited by the scope of measures they have the authority to grant on the
merits. This element plays a significant role in international investment arbitration since
the remedies that could be granted against a sovereign state are limited in nature.

This question has been dealt with at length in OPC v. Ecuador, where the issue at stake was
the possibility to grant specific performance against a state by way of interim relief.
Relying on a long-standing jurisprudence on expropriation, the tribunal considered that
“[i]t is well established that where a State has, in the exercise of its sovereign powers, put
anend to a contract ora license, or any other foreign investor's entitlement, specific
performance must be deemed legally impossible.” (317) Hence, interim measures
consisting of a restitutio in integrum are deemed to infringe rights of host states stemming
from their permanent sovereignty over their natural resources. Considering that there is no
arguable “right to specific performance where a natural resources concession agreement
has been terminated or cancelled by a sovereign state,” (318) the arbitral tribunal refused
to grant a measure that would not have been available on the merits. The solution would
be identical if the measure sought would compel the state to modify its regulatory
framework. (319)

(ii) Proportionality of the measure. According to the arbitrators in Sergei Paushok v.
Mongolia, the tribunal “is called upon to weigh the balance of inconvenience inthe
P 819 imposition of interim measures upon the parties.” (320) Interestingly, some arbitrators
—pen9 Nave already relied @ on the principles of state responsibility in public international law
~ to justify the recourse to the principle of proportionality while considering interim relief.

In OPC v. Ecuador, (321) mention was made of Article 35 of the ILC Articles on State
Responsibility (322) providing that “[a] State responsible for an internationally wrongful act
is under an obligation to make restitution ... provided and to the extent that restitution ...
(b) [dloes not involve a burden out of proportion to the benefits deriving from restitution
instead of compensation.” This parallel seems perfectly logical, as interim relief and
reparation both seek the same objective of protection of rights, and it would be
inconsistent to grant an interim measure that would have been disproportionate, therefore
breaching the principles of reparation in state responsibility.

This limitation justifies the possibility for the arbitrator to decide interim relief not only
proprio mutu, but also ultra petita. (323) Indeed, parties may have a penchant for
exaggerating the relief sought, file too general interim requests, (324) and tribunals have
the authority to adapt these requests to what is strictly necessary to “prevent the erosion
of rights pending final resolution of the dispute.” (325) An example can be found in Sergei
Paushok v. Mongolia, where the arbitral tribunal, considering that “different measures with
equivalent results can also be considered,” rejected the specific measure sought by the
requesting party and retained another one “having the same effect.” (326) Likewise, it is
obvious that interim measures “are not deemed to give to the party requesting them more
rights than it ever possessed and has title to claim.” (327)

IV Conclusion

Putting aside the contingent shortcomings in the legal reasoning and the lack of clarity of
some arbitral interim decisions, an analysis of interim protection in international
investment arbitration has demonstrated a great convergence in the practice of arbitral
tribunals. This is true despite textual differences in rules governing the conduct of
proceedings, mostly between the ICSID Convention and other arbitral mechanisms. While
this could suggest the emergence of a distinct regime, the recurrent reliance by arbitrators
on the jurisprudence of international courts and tribunals suggests a penchant and a
tendency to bind themselves more to the public international law sphere than toa
transnational regime of international commercial arbitration. Apart from this, interim
protection is an essential function of adjudication that actually goes beyond the written @
rules deemed to govern the arbitration process and highlights the inherent part of
imperium every tribunal enjoys, be it a domestic, interstate, or arbitral body.

ro
P 820
P 821
vv

However, the imperium of arbitral tribunals is far from being identical to that of national
courts. Lacking the coercive powers of the latter, arbitrators should exclusively focus on
their mission of adjudication, and the scope of their interim powers should reflect this
genuine jurisdictio function. In practice, tribunals arbitrating investment disputes have
been reluctant to grant interim measures which guarantee the execution of the award,
highlighting the profound discontinuity between arbitration and litigation. The recourse to
domestic courts remains a core issue in international investment arbitration, where a
significant distinction between ICSID and non-ICSID arbitration appears. Indeed, while the
possibility to request interim relief before domestic courts is the default rule for the latter,
it requires an opt-in process for the former, therefore, non-ICSID arbitral frameworks leave
greater room for the adoption of interim measures by domestic courts, not to mention that
arbitral interim measures are more likely to be enforced in the same forums when they
emanate from non-ICSID tribunals. Consequently, investors and states, when negotiating
arbitration agreements or investment treaties, should be aware of this crucial distinction
between the two kinds of arbitral mechanisms.

20
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
However, recourse to such measures in domestic courts has also shown a potentially
dangerous exploitation of interim protection as a weapon serving the bargaining power of
the requesting party to settle the dispute, rather than the efficiency of the entire
arbitration process. Such strategies can be counterproductive in the long run and the risks
of growing mistrust in international investment arbitration frameworks should not be
underestimated. International investment arbitration is a dispute resolution mechanism
exclusively depending on consent, and it should not be forgotten that the major declines in
international justice, as well as withdrawals of unilateral declarations recognizing the
compulsory jurisdiction of the I.C.J., often occurred after decisions that states felt
assaulted their sovereignty or misinterpreted their consent. (328) While the development
of interim protection of rights consolidates and strengthens the place of international
judges or arbitrators and, more broadly, the progress of the “judicialization” of
international law, the overall growing tendency towards (not to say sometimes abuses of)
requests for interim measures in investor-state or interstate disputes (329) contributes also
to this rising skepticism, and certainly weakens and possibly jeopardizes the overall

ro
P 821 yas . :
———_ sustainability of these dispute settlement mechanisms.@

References

*) Ph.D. (Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne), LL.M. (Columbia Law School, Harlan
Fiske Stone Scholar), Research and Teaching Fellow in Public International Law at
Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne (since 2004). The author is grateful to Prof.
Pieter Bekker, Christopher Boog, Eugenia Levine, and Matthew Jasilli for their useful
comments on previous drafts of this article and wishes to thank Prof. Franco Ferrari
for stimulating discussions on this topic. The views expressed in this article are those
of the author only and any errors or omissions are his sole responsibility.

1) Lawrence Collins, Provisional and Protective Measures in International Litigation, 234
Recueil des Cours 9, 23 (1993).

2) Jerome B. Elkind, Interim Protection: A Functional Approach 162 (1981).

3) Guillaume Le Floch, L'Urgence devant les juridictions internationales 422 (2008)
(pointing out that the executive function corresponds to the present, and the
legislative function to the future).

4) Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)), 1993 I.C.J.
3, 16, para. 25 (Order of April 8) (request for the indication of provisional measures).

5) Le Floch, supra note 3, at 422. The scope of the arbitrator's imperium is to be
distinguished from that of the domestic judge. See Charle Jarrosson, Réflexions sur
L'imperium, in Etudes offertes a Pierre Bellet 245, 260 et seq. (1991) (according to
whom the imperium is comprised of the imperium merum, reflecting the coercive
powers of public authorities, and the imperium mixtum, corresponding to the powers
permitting the fulfillment of the jurisdictio function, including, e.g., the measures of
judicial administration such as ordering the production of evidence. The arbitrator is
endowed with the imperium mixtum but lacks the imperium merum of the domestic
judge.)

6) Fora recent and comprehensive study, see Ali Yesilirmak, Provisional Measures in
International Commercial Arbitration (2005).

7) Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals
of Other States, March 18, 1965, 575 U.N.T.S. 159 [hereinafter “ICSID Convention”]; Rules
of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (2006), available at
<http://icsid.world bank.org/ICSID/StaticFiles/basicdoc/CRR_English-final.pdf>
[hereinafter “ICSID Arbitration Rules”].

8) Rules Governing the Additional Facility for the Administration of Proceedings by the
Secretariat of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (2006),
available at <http://icsid.worldbank.org/ICSID/StaticFiles/facility/AFR_English-
final.pdf> [hereinafter “ICSID Additional Facility Rules”.

9) United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Arbitration Rules, U.N. G.A.
Res. 31/98, U.N. Doc. A/31/17 (December 15, 1976) [hereinafter “UNCITRAL Rules”].

10) Arbitration Rules of the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
(2007), available at
<www.sccinstitute.se /filearchive /2/21686/2007_arbitration_rules_eng.pdf>
[hereinafter “SCC Rules”].

11) Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (1998), available at
<www.iccwbo.org/uploadedFiles/Court/Arbitration/other/rules_arb_english.pdf>
[hereinafter “ICC Rules”].

12) Arbitration Rules of the London Court of International Arbitration (1998), available at
<www.lcia.org/ARB_folder/arb_english_main.htm> [hereinafter “LCIA Rules”].

13) Noah D. Rubins & Norman Stephan Kinsella, International Investment, Political Risk
and Dispute Resolution: A Practitioner's Guide 311 (2005).

14) ICSID Arbitration Rules, art. 48(4), provides that “[t]he Centre shall not publish the
award without the consent of the parties. The Centre shall, however, promptly include
in its publications excerpts of the legal reasoning of the Tribunal.”

21
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
15)

16)

17)
18)
19)

20)

21)
22)
23)
24)

25)

26)
27)

28)

29)

30)

31)

32)
33)

34)

35)

See, e.g., Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 9. For instance, in an ICSID case, the arbitral
tribunal noted the difference of terminology between the ICSID Convention and the
Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) and stated that “[t]he ICSID
Convention uses the term ‘provisional measures,’ CAFTA uses ‘interim measures.’ Both
terms are used in this decision without any attempt to distinguish between them.”
See also Railroad Development Corp. v. Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/23, Decision on Provisional Measures, October 15, 2008, para. 1 n.1, available
at <http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/RDC-ProvisionalMeasures.pdf>.

Emmanuel Gaillard, La jurisprudence du CIRDI 226-27 (2004). This author underlines
the necessary distinction between the conservatory measures prior to the
enforcement of the award, such as attachments, and other provisional measures such
as the preservation of evidence, the latter being the exclusive province of the arbitral
tribunal, whereas the former could potentially be granted by domestic courts. See
also infra notes 217-246 and accompanying text.

Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 9.

Carlo Santulli, Droit du contentieux international 456 (2005).

Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 56-58. See also infra notes 166-180 and accompanying
text.

Andrea Giardina, ICSID: A Self-Contained, Non-National Review System, in International
Arbitration in the 21st Century: Towards “Judicialization” and Uniformity? 199 et seq.
(Richard B. Lillich & Charles N. Brower eds., 1994); Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 62;
Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary 666 (2001).

ICSID Arbitration Rules, art. 39(6). See also infra notes 78-87 and accompanying text.
Schreuer, supra note 20, at 672, 683.

Id. at 1078.

The arrangement Is subject to the possibility of attracting a more favorable interim
protection regime through the most-favored-nation clause mechanism. See Alejandro
Faya Rodriguez, The Most-Favored-Nation Clause in International Investment
Agreements: A Tool for Treaty Shopping? 25 J. Int'l Arb. 89 (2008); Bruno Poulain,
Clauses de la nation la plus favorisée et clauses d'arbitrage investisseur-état: est-ce la
fin de la jurisprudence Maffezini? 25 A.S.A. Bull. 279 (2007).

An odd situation might arise if the consent for an ICSID arbitration lies in the host
state legislation. We could indeed wonder if it implies the application of the lex
arbitri. To our knowledge, no dispute has dealt with this issue so far. However, art. 44
of the ICSID Convention indicates that the provisions of the Convention and the
Arbitration Rules shall govern the arbitration “except as the parties otherwise agree.”
Although the unilateral character of the host state legislation renders the lex arbitri
not agreed upon between parties, it could be argued that the investor's consent to
ICSID jurisdiction through host state legislation implies an acceptance of the
conditions under which the host state has consented to offer jurisdiction to an ICSID
tribunal.

Schreuer, supra note 20, at 672-73.

Railroad Development Corp. v. Republic of Guatemala, supra note 15, paras. 27-30
(the arbitral tribunal reproduced the relevant provisions on interim measures
included inthe ICSID Convention, ICSID Arbitration Rules, and the CAFTA without
discussing the interplay between them).

Art. 18(c) of the agreement mentioned in the arbitral tribunal's decision, see infra
note 29, para. 7.

Tanzania Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. v. Independent Power Tanzania Ltd., ICSID Case
No. ARB/98/8, Decision on Request for Provisional Measures, December 20, 1999, 8
ICSID Rep. 239, para. 11.

North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), U.S.-Canada-Mexico, December 17,
1992, 32 |.L.M. 289; 32 I.L.M. 605.

Model Bilateral Investment Treaty (2004), art. 28(8), available at
<www.ustr.gov/assets/Trade_Sectors/Investment/Model_BIT/asset_upload_file847_6
897.pdf> [hereinafter “2004 U.S. Model BIT”).

NAFTA, supra note 30, except for the situation where the provisions of the ICSID
Convention and Arbitration Rules are mandatory.

Meg N. Kinnear et al., Investment Disputes Under NAFTA: An Annotated Guide to NAFTA
Chapter 11, 1134-35 (2006).

See the recent amendments (U.N. Doc. A/RES/61/33 (2006)) resulting in the
modification of art. 17 (“Interim Measures and Preliminary Orders”) of the UNCITRAL
Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration, available at
<www.uncitral.org/pdf/english/texts/arbitration/ml-arb/07-86998_Ebook.pdf>
[hereinafter “UNCITRAL Model Law’”].

Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 60.

22

© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
36)

37)

38)

39)

40)

41)

42)

43)

44)

45)

46)
47)

48)
49)

50)

51)

52)
53)

The fact that the consent for arbitration lies ina public international law instrument
such asa bilateral investment treaty does not preclude the application of the
mandatory rules included in the lex arbitri if the seat of arbitration is neither located
inthe country of citizenship of the investor, nor the host state of the investment. In
the latter case, the lex arbitri is superseded by an international agreement binding on
the two states, but this is unlikely to happen considering that the seat of arbitration
is rarely chosen outside one of these two states. Otherwise the lex arbitri of a third
state is not superseded by the investment treaty, considering that “a treaty does not
create either obligations or rights for a third State without its consent,” according to
the res inter alios acta principle embedded in art. 34 of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties, May 23, 1969, 1165 U.N.T.S. 331.

EnCana Corp. v. Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, LCIA Case No. U.N.3481, Interim
Award: Request for Interim Measures of Protection, January 31, 2004, para. 10,
available at <http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Encana-InterimAward.pdf>. See also
Metalclad Corp. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Procedural
Order No. 1, October 27, 1997, para. 7, available at
<http://naftaclaims.com/Disputes/Mexico/Metalclad /MetalcladProceduralOrder1.p
df> (noting that the request “does not invoke article 47 of the Additional Facility Rules
which deals with provisional measures of protection. Even so, the reference to article
1134 of NAFTA is sufficient to oblige the Tribunal to consider whether the situation is
One requiring an order for provisional measures of protection”).

ICSID Additional Facility Rules, art. 46; UNCITRAL Rules, art. 26; SCC Rules, art. 31; ICC
Rules, art. 23; LCIA Rules, art. 25.

The lex arbitri can also empower the arbitral tribunal itself to adopt interim
measures. See Guy Robin, Conservatory and Provisional Measures in International
Arbitration: The Role of State Courts, Int'l Bus. L. J. 319, 320 et seq. (2008).

For some examples of leges arbitri empowering exclusively domestic courts to grant
provisional measures, see Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 64.

See, e.g., art. 1696(1) of the Belgian Judicial Code forbidding an arbitral tribunal
seated in Belgium ordering of seizure of goods; Eric Schafer, Herman Verbist, &
Christophe Imhoos, ICC Arbitration in Practice 115 (2005).

See, e.g., the hypothetical cases highlighting the crucial importance of this lapse,
cited in Ben H. Sheppard, Jr. & John M. Townsend, Holding the Fort Until the Arbitrators
are Appointed: The New ICDR International Emergency Rule, 61 Disp. Resol. J. 75, 76-77
(No. 2, 2006).

ICSID Convention, art. 66(1). Indeed, an amendment to the ICSID Convention would
have been necessary considering that, under art. 47 of the Convention, it is the sole
authority for the arbitral tribunal to adopt interim protective measures.

Yves Derains & Eric A. Schwartz, A Guide to ICC Rules of Arbitration 297-98 (2d ed.
2005). For some recent applications, see Jean-Paul Beraudo, Recognition and
Enforcement of Interim Measures of Protection Ordered by Arbitral Tribunals, 22 J. Int'l
Arb. 245, 250 (2005); Emmanuel Gaillard, ICC Pre-Arbitral Referee: A Procedure into its
Stride, N.Y.L.J., October 5, 2006, at 3.

International Arbitration Rules of the International Centre for Dispute Resolution of
the American Arbitration Association (2008), available at <www.adr.org/sp.asp?
id=33994#I nternational%20Arbitration> [hereinafter “AAA-ICDR Rules” ].

See AAA-ICDR Rules, art. 37.

Sheppard & Townsend, supra note 42, at 77-78. See also Guillaume Lemenez & Paul
Quigley, Emergency Arbitrator: The ICDR's Procedure in Action, Part I: Look at the
Empirical Data, Disp. Resol. J. 1 (2008).

ICSID Arbitration Rules, art. 39(1); ICSID Additional Facility Rules, art. 46(1); SCC Rules,
art. 31(1); ICC Rules, art. 23(1).

ICSID Arbitration Rules, art. 39(3); ICSID Additional Facility Rules, art. 46(2). See also
Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 200-01.

The possibility for an arbitral tribunal to adopt interim measures will, however,
depend on certain conditions, such as the requirement of a prima facie jurisdiction.
See infra notes 265-276 and accompanying text. Moreover, we should note that the
waiting period before initiating arbitration “need not have lapsed ... if negotiation
attempts were clearly futile.” See Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC
Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, UNCITRAL, Order on Interim Measures, September 2,
2008, para. 52, available at <http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Paushok-Interim.pdf>.
Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, ICSID Case
No. ARB/98/2, Decision on the Request for Provisional Measures, September 25, 2001,
6 ICSID Rep. 375, 378, para. 5.

Railroad Development Corp. v. Republic of Guatemala, supra note 15, para. 31.
Santulli, supra note 18, at 440-41.

23

© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
54)

55)
56)
57)

58)

59)
60)
61)

62)

63)

64)

65)
66)
67)
68)
69)

70)
71)
72)
73)

74)

75)
76)

77)

UNCITRAL Rules, art. 26(1) (“[a]t the request of either party”); SCC Rules, art. 26(1) (“at
the request of a party”); ICC Rules, art. 23(1) (“at the request of a party”); LCIA Rules,
art. 25(1) (“on the application of any party”). Albeit art. 26(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules
clearly indicates that the arbitral tribunal may take any interim measures “at the
request of the party,” the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal has already considered
that its power to order interim relief proprio mutu “is in no way restricted by the
language in Article 26 of the Tribunal Rules.” See also Rockwell Int'l Systems, Inc. v.
Islamic Republic of Iran, Ministry of Defence, Award No. ITM 20-430-1, June 6, 1983, 2
lran-U.S. C.T.R. 369, 371.

For some examples, see Schreuer, supra note 20, at 749-50.

Schreuer, supra note 20, at 749.

The I.C.J. indicated interim measures proprio mutu only once in its history; Karin
Oellers-Frahm, Article 41, in The Statute of the International Court of Justice: A
Commentary 923, 945 (A. Zimmermann, C. Tomuschat, & K. Oellers-Frahm eds., 2005).

Julian D.M. Lew, Loukas A. Mistelis, & Stefan Michael Kroll, Comparative International
Commercial Arbitration 789 (2003).

ICSID Arbitration Rules, art. 39(2); ICSID Additional Facility Rules, art. 46(1).

ICSID Arbitration Rules, art. 39(3); ICSID Additional Facility Rules, art. 46(2).

For more details, see Pierre Lalive, The First “World Bank” Arbitration (Holiday Inns v.
Morocco): Some Legal Problems, 51 British Y.B. Int'l L. 123, 136 (1980).

Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Decision on Jurisdiction,
December 8, 2003, para. 14; the tribunal held that “in the circumstances of the case
and at that stage of proceedings, it was not ina position to recommend the specific
measure requested or to propose others with the same objective.” Available at
<http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Azurix-Jurisdiction.pdf>. See also infra notes 320-
327 and accompanying text.

NAFTA, art. 1134; 2004 U.S. Model BIT, art. 28(8). NAFTA's commentators, doubting the
obviousness of this solution, pointed out that “Article 1134 is silent on whether a
tribunal can issue an order for interim measures on its own initiative ... A tribunal
operating under Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules cannot issue an order for
interim measures sua sponte. It will be interesting to see how a tribunal addresses
this difference in applicable arbitration rules if it arises in Chapter 11 Context.”
Kinnear et al., supra note 33, at 1134-211.

ICSID Arbitration Rules, art. 39(4); ICSID Additional Facility Rules, art. 46(3). In City
Oriente Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Provisional Measures,
November 19, 2007, para. 70, the tribunal considered that this provision “does not
require that each party has actually submitted its observations, but that it has been
afforded an opportunity to do so—where, provided that such opportunity has been
afforded, a party has failed to do so or has partially done so, the tribunal will have
met the regulatory requirement and there is no obstacle to the ordering of
provisional measures.” Available at <http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/CityOrient-
ProvisionalMeasures-EN.pdf>. See also Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador
and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6,
Decision on Provisional Measures, May 8, 2009, para. 68, available at
<http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/PerencoEcuadorDecision.pdf>.

Lew, Mistelis, & Kroll, supra note 58, at 607.

Kinnear et al., supra note 33, at 1134-44.

UNCITRAL Rules, art. 15(1).

SCC Rules, art. 20(3); ICC Rules, art. 15(2); LCIA Rules, art. 14(1).

According to the arbitral tribunal in that case, “[t]he powers of the tribunal relating to
interim (or provisional) measures are set in Articles 15(1), 26(1) and 26(2) of [UNCITRAL]
rules,” see Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v.
Mongolia, supra note 50, para. 34 (art. 15(1) relates to the general due process rights of
the parties).

Lew, Mistelis, & Kroll, supra note 58, at 606-07.

Kinnear et al., supra note 33, at 1134-213 et seq.

Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 223-24; Lew, Mistelis, & Kroll, supra note 58, at 607-08.
Andrew Tweedale & Keren Tweedale, Arbitration of Commercial Disputes:
International and English Law and Practice 304-05 (2005).

Pieter H.F. Bekker, Provisional Measures in the Recent Practice of the International
Court of Justice, 7 Int'l L. Forum 24, 31 (2005) (citing LaGrand (Germany v. United States
of America), infra note 138, and pointing out that “in case of extreme urgency” such as
“the possibility of a death sentence being carried out by the Respondent in the days
following the submission of the request,” the I.C.J. is “likely to dispense with
hearings”).

Schreuer, supra note 20, at 750.

According to art. 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, a party may request annulment of
the award if “there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure.”

According to art. V(1)(b) of the 1958 New York Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, June 10, 1958, 330 U.N.T.S. 38 [hereinafter
“New York Convention” ], the recognition or enforcement of a foreign arbitral award
may be refused if “the party against whom the award is invoked was... unable to
present his case.”

24

© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
78)
79)

80)
81)

82)
83)

84)
85)

86)

87)

88)

89)
90)
91)
92)
93)
94)
95)
96)
97)
98)
99)
100)

Fora summary of the arguments on both sides, see Schreuer, supra note 20, at 382-83.
For instance, in Atlantic Triton Co. v. People's Revolutionary Republic of Guinea, ICSID
Case No. ARB/84/1, Award, April 21, 1986, 3 ICSID Rep. 17, 35, the claimant sought
attachment of property before French courts before starting ICSID arbitration. His
request was first accepted by the Commercial Court of Quimper (October 12, 1983),
then refused by a judgment of the Cour d'appel of Rennes which pointed out (October
26, 1984) that “the clear purpose and spirit of the Convention, as revealed by the
Arbitration Rules, implies that the arbitral tribunal has the general and exclusive
power to rule not only on the merits of the dispute but also on all provisional
measures.” The Cour de Cassation quashed this judgment (November 18, 1986),
considering that art. 26 of the ICSID Convention “was not intended to prohibit parties
from applying to a national court to seek conservatory measures in order to
guarantee the execution of an award which might subsequently be given” (3 ICSID
Rep. 5-12). Between the two latter decisions, the arbitral tribunal decided that ICSID
jurisdiction to recommend such measures “should be exclusive and prohibit any
recourse to national courts, traditionally and universally recognized as having sole
jurisdiction to order such measures.” For an overview of the relevant ICSID cases, see
Collins, supra note 1, at 101-5.

Atlantic Triton Co. v. People's Revolutionary Republic of Guinea, supra note 79, at 35.
Charles N. Brower & Ronald E.M. Goodman, Provisional Measures and the Protection of
ICSID Jurisdictional Exclusivity Against Municipal Proceedings, 6 ICSID Rev. 431, 435 (No.
2, 1991).

Lew, Mistelis & Kroll, supra note 58, at 788.

NAFTA, art. 1121(1)(b) and (2)(b), specify that the investor “waive[s] their right to
initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under the law of any
Party ... except for proceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary
relief, not involving the payment of damages, before an administrative tribunal or
court under the law of the disputing Party.” Kinnear et al., supra note 33, at 1134-212.
2004 U.S. Model BIT, art. 25(3), provides that “the claimant ... may initiate or continue
an action that seeks interim injunctive relief and does not involve the payment of
monetary damages before a judicial or administrative tribunal of the respondent,
provided that the action is brought for the sole purpose of preserving the claimant's
or the enterprise's rights and interests during the pendency of the arbitration.”
Rubins & Kinsella, supra note 13, at 275.

It is therefore important for domestic courts to deal very carefully with the condition
of likelihood of success on the merits which is a frequent prerequisite for the granting
of provisional measures in domestic law.

Contra Katia Yannaca-Small, Parallel Proceedings, in The Oxford Handbook of
International Investment 1008, 1027 (Peter Muchlinski, Federico Ortino, & Christoph H.
Schreuer eds., 2008) (author sees in art. 47 of the ICSID Convention or art. 1134 of
NAFTA an “exception to the ‘fork-in-the road’ rule [that] would allow the investor to
seek interim or injunctive relief under domestic procedures without foreclosing his
rights to initiate international arbitration”). In our view, this opinion misinterprets
those two articles referring to the “tribunal” as the arbitral tribunal and not any
domestic court.

Some guidance may be found in Enron Corp. and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, January 14, 2004, para.
98, where the tribunal held that a strictly defensive measure may not trigger the “fork
inthe road” mechanism, available at <http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Enron-
Jurisdiction.pdf>.

The existence of the arbitration agreement, as well as the possibility of state court
intervention, embedded inthe arbitration rules will be considered as a waiver of
immunity from jurisdiction, thereby empowering domestic courts for the taking of
interim protective measures. However, their implementation may be restricted in
practice by the rules of sovereign immunity regarding the assets that are available in
the case of a pre-award security. For some examples, see infra notes 232-246 and
accompanying text.

ICSID Additional Facility Rules, art. 46(4).

UNCITRAL Rules, art. 26(3).

SCC Rules, art. 31(2).

ICC Rules, art. 23(2).

LCIA Rules, art. 25(3).

ICC Rules, art. 23(2).

LCIA Rules, art. 25(3).

Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 93.

Lew, Mistelis, & Kroll, supra note 58, at 618.

Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 95.

Id. at 71.

Notably in ICSID Convention arbitration; Lew, Mistelis, & Kroll, supra note 58, at 593.
This issue will be developed infra notes 183-190 and accompanying text.

25

© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
101) Andrea Carlevaris, The Enforcement of Interim Measures Ordered by International
Arbitrators: Different Legislative Approaches and Recent Developments in the
Amendment of the UNCITRAL Model Law, in Interim Measures in International
Commercial Arbitration 13 (Association for International Arbitration ed., 2007);
Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 238.

102) To our knowledge, the only reference suggesting that a recommendation of an ICSID
tribunal may be enforced by a domestic court is the decision of the Cour d'appel of
Rennes related to Atlantic Triton, see supra note 79, where the French court pointed
out that “[t]he necessity for the parties to have recourse to national courts for the
implementation of conservatory measures recommended by the arbitral tribunal
cannot constitute a valid argument for depriving the arbitrators of all jurisdiction in
the matter” (3 ICSID Rep. 9).

103) See, e.g., Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile,
supra note 51, para. 17 et seq.; City Oriente Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa
Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador, supra note 64, para. 92; Emilio Agustin Maffezini v.
Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Procedural Order No. 2, October 28, 1999,
para. 9, available at <http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Maffezini-
ProvisionalMeasure-English_000.pdf>.

104) See ICSID Convention, art. 48.

105) Id. art. 53(2) provides that “[flor the purpose of this Section, ‘award’ shall include any
decision interpreting, revising or annulling such award pursuant to Article 50, 51 or
52.”

106) Schreuer, supra note 20, at 1110 et seq.

107) For instance, provisions of NAFTA, art. 1136, related to the “finality and enforcement of
the award” have been considered by certain authors as potentially covering decisions
on interim measures. Kinnear et al., supra note 33, at 1134-215.

108) Tanzania Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. v. Independent Power Tanzania Ltd., supra note
29, para. 32 (“The conclusions of the Tribunal in relation to the Request for Provisional
Measures... were published in the form of ‘Decisions’ to be incorporated into our
Final Award by reference in due course”).

109) For instance, in Mine v. Guinea, a Swiss court relied heavily on the decision of the
ICSID arbitral tribunal recommending the cessation of proceedings in domestic
courts and lifted the attachment that was previously granted (see 4 ICSID Rep. 45-53).
In CSOB v. Slovakia, however, the Slovak Supreme Court did not follow the
recommendations of the ICSID tribunal to suspend domestic bankruptcy proceedings;
see Schreuer, supra note 20, at 760-61.

110) As pointed out by an UNCITRAL working group, “arbitrations are often conducted ina
State that has little or nothing to do with the subject-matter in dispute,” see U.N. Doc.
A/CN.9/WG.I|/WP.108, para. 76, and the courts of the place of arbitration may not
have effective jurisdiction over the parties or the assets,” see U.N. Doc. A/CN.9/460,
para. 119.

111) For some useful insights, see Tijana Kojovic, Court Enforcement of Arbitral Decisions on
Provisional Relief: How Final is Provisional, 18 J. Int'l Arb. 513, 513-20 (2001); Yesilirmak,
supra note 6, at 247-54.

112) Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 258-59, “neither will be considered the rare situations
where domestic laws provide a special regime for the recognition and enforcement of
foreign arbitral interim measures,” and the specific situations of transposition of
arbitral interim measures into court orders, therefore “portable” as domestic court
orders (at 255-57).

113) ICSID Additional Facility Rules, art. 46(3); SCC Rules, art. 31(1); LCIA Rules, art. 25(1).
114) ICC Rules, art. 23(1). It is worth mentioning that art. 23(2) refers to “[t]he application of
a party to a judicial authority for such measures or for the implementation of any

such measures ordered by an Arbitral Tribunal.”

115) UNCITRAL Rules, art. 26(2).

116) Notably that the award must state the reasons on which it is based; see UNCITRAL
Rules, art. 32; ICC Rules, art. 25; SCC Rules, art. 32; LCIA Rules, art. 26; ICSID Additional
Facility Rules, art. 52.

117) Tweedale & Tweedale, supra note 73, at 328-32; Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 192-93.

118) New York Convention, art. 1(1).

119) Tweedale & Tweedale, supra note 73, at 328.

120) Derains & Schwartz, supra note 44, at 275 (“Albeit it has a psychological dimension for
arbitrators.”). As underlined by authors, under the ICC Rules, arbitrators have the
power to tag their interim measures as an award with “the hope that it will enhance
the possible enforcement of the arbitrator's decision.”

26
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
121) Tweedale & Tweedale, supra note 73, at 331-32. See also Marc J. Goldstein, Are
Interlocutory Orders Arbitral Awards? Interpreting the New York Convention: When
Should an Interlocutory Arbitral “Order” be Treated as an “Award”?, in American
Arbitration Association Handbook on International Arbitration and ADR 178 (Thomas E.
Carbonneau ed., 2006) (discussing the decision in Publicis Communication v. True
North Communications Inc., 206 F.3d 725 (7th Cir. 2000). The U.S. Court of Appeals for
the Seventh Circuit rejected the argument according to which an arbitral decision not
labeled as “award” but “order” cannot be enforceable, as “extreme and untenable
formalism” and that the “consistent use of the label ‘award’ when discussing final
arbitral decisions does not bestow transcendental significance on the term. Their
treatment of ‘award’ as interchangeable with final does not necessarily mean that
synonyms such as decision, opinion, order, or ruling could not also be final. The
content of a decision—not its nomenclature—determines finality” (at 728)). Contra, for
example, the different position of the Australian courts in Resort Condominiums Inc.
v. Ray Bowell and Resort Condominiums Pty. Ltd., October 29, 1993 (Sup. Ct.
Queensland) 20 Y.B. Comm. Arb. 628) considering that “the reference to ‘arbitral
award’ in the Convention does not include an interlocutory order made by an
arbitrator but only an award which finally determines the rights of the parties.” /d. at
640.

122) Tweedale & Tweedale, supra note 73, at 332.

123) For an overview of the case law on this issue, see Kojovic, supra note 111, at 522-27;
Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 261-62. However, it must be stressed that such a position
is not shared by all domestic courts, nor commentators. Id. at 262-65.

124) Supra note 121.

125) Art. 17(h)(1) of the UNCITRAL Model Law, supra note 34, provides that “[a]n interim
measure issued by an arbitral tribunal shall be recognized as binding and, unless
otherwise provided by the arbitral tribunal, enforced upon application to the
competent court, irrespective of the country in which it was issued.” On the work of
UNCITRAL on this issue, see Kojovic, supra note 111, at 529-31; Yesilirmak, supra note 6,
at 265-69.

126) ICC Rules, art. 23(1); SCC Rules, art. 31(1); LCIA Rules, art. 25(1), (2).

127) ICSID Additional Facility Rules, art. 46(3).

128) UNCITRAL Rules, art. 26(1).

129) Emphasis added.

130) See, e.g., Vacuum Salt Products Ltd. v. Government of the Republic of Ghana, ICSID
Case No. ARB/92/1, Decision No. 1 on Request for Recommendation of Provisional
Measures, December 3, 1992 (cited in Award, February 16, 1994, 9 ICSID Rev. 72, 79,
para. 16 (1994), where Ghana assured the tribunal “that it will not deny Vacuum Salt
Products Limited ... access to its records, including any which are required for its
compensation claim in this proceeding.” The arbitral tribunal also took note “of the
fact that Vacuum Salt Products Limited acknowledged and accepted these
undertakings as satisfying the concerns expressed in its Request for Provisional
Measures.”

131) Schreuer, supra note 20, at 757-58 (showing evidence that the term “recommend” was
preferred to “prescribe” and that the availability of interim awards on provisional
measures was not held established). See also Brower & Goodman, supra note 81, at
440.

132) Agip S.p.A. v. Government of the People's Republic of Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/77/1,
Award of November 30, 1979, 1 ICSID Rep. 306, 311, para. 9 (citing the decision of the
arbitral tribunal of January 18, 1979 addressing recommendations to the Government
of Congo); Amco Asia Corp. & others v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1,
Decision on Request for Provisional Measures, December 9, 1983, 1 |CSID Rep. 410, 412
(underlining that “the Tribunal does not deem it appropriate to issue a
recommendation to the parties”); Ceskoslovenska Obchondi Banka, A.S. v. Slovak
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Procedural Order No. 4, January 11, 1999, available
at <http://icsid.worldbank.org/ICSID/FrontServlet?
requestType=CasesRH&actionVal=showDoc&docld=DC561_En&caseld=C160>, where
the tribunal “[rlecommends that the above-mentioned bankruptcy proceedings be
suspended.”

133) Atlantic Triton Co. v. People's Revolutionary Republic of Guinea, supra note 79, at 35
(original emphasis).

134) Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, supra note 103, para. 9.

135) Id. This argument was also used in City Oriente Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and
Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador, supra note 64, para. 52, where the tribunal
referred specifically to rule 39(1).

136) Interpreting art. 47 of the ICSID Convention, in Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case
No. ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No. 1, Claimant's Request for Provisional Measures,
July 1, 2003, para. 3, the tribunal mentioned “the circumstances require that
provisional measures be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party,”
available at <http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/tokios-order1.pdf>. It must be
stressed, however, that the tribunal upheld the binding force of provisional measures;
see infra note 154.

137) Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, supra note
51, para. 17.

27
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
138)
139)
140)
141)
142)
143)
144)
145)
146)
147)
148)
149)
150)

151)

152)

153)

154)
155)

156)

157)
158)
159)

160)

161)
162)
163)

164)

165)

166)

167)

168)

LaGrand (Germany v. United States of America), 2001 I.C.J. 466 (Judgment of June 27).
Id. para. 109.

Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, supra note
51, para. 26.

Id. paras. 18-20.

Id. paras. 22-23.

Id. para. 20.

Id. para. 25.

Id. para. 18.

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, art. 31(1).

Webster's Il New College Dictionary 926 (1995).

Id. at 564.

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case
No. ARB/01/13, Procedural Order No. 2, October 16, 2002, 8 ICSID Rep. 388, 397.
Zhinvali Development Ltd. v. Republic of Georgia, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/1, Order,
January 24, 2002, cited in Award, January 24, 2003, 10 ICSID Rep. 6, 18, para. 44.

Plama Consortium Ltd. v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Order on
Provisional Measures, September 6, 2005, para. 38, available at
<http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/PlamaOrderonProvisionalMeasures.pdf>.

Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/22, Procedural Order No. 1, Request for Provisional Measures, September 31,
2006, paras. 88-98, available at
<http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/BiwaterTanzaniaProvisionalMeasures31March2006
.pdf>; Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/22, Procedural Order No. 3, September 29, 2006, para. 163, available at
<http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Biwater-PONo.3.pdf>.

Saipem S.p.A. v. People's Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Decision
on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures, March 21, 2007, para.
173, available at <http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Saipem-Bangladesh-
Jurisdiction.pdf>.

Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine (No. 1), supra note 136, para. 4.

Occidental Petroleum Corp. and Occidental Exploration & Production Co. v. Ecuador,
ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Provisional Measures, August 17, 2007, para. 58,
available at <http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Oxy_001.pdf>.

City Oriente Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador,
supra note 64, para. 52. See also Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and
Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador, supra note 64, paras. 66-77 (relying on the
case law of the I.C.)., of the European Court of Human Rights, and of the Iran-United
States Claims Tribunal, and stating that “[i]t is now generally accepted that
provisional measures are tantamount to orders, and are binding on the party to which
they are directed.”).

Robert Kolb, Note on the New International Case-Law Concerning the Binding Character
of Provisional Measures, 74 Nordic J. Int'l L. 117, 129 (2005).

Lucius Caflisch, Provisional Measures in the International Protection of Human Rights:
The Mamatkulov Case, in Volkerrecht als Wertordnung [Common Values in
International Law] Festschrift fiir [Essays in Honour of] Christian Tomuschat 493 (2006).
Le Floch, supra note 3, at 401-14.

Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgaria (Belgium v. Bulgaria), 1939 P.C.I.J. (ser. A/B)
No. 79, at 199 (Order of December 5) (Request for the Indication of Interim Measures of
Protection). See also Paolo Palchetti, The Power of the International Court of Justice to
Indicate Provisional Measures to Prevent the Aggravation of a Dispute, 21 Leiden J. Int'l
L. 623, 624 et seq. (2008).

Elkind, supra note 2, at 23 et seq.

Kolb, supra note 157, at 612.

Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, supra note
51, para. 69.

City Oriente Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador,
supra note 64, para. 88 (while mentioning this decision, the arbitral tribunal
surprisingly referred to an “early decision of the International Court of Justice”).
Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, supra note
51, para. 65.

Gerald Fitzmaurice, The Law and Procedure of the International Court of Justice, vol.
Il, 542-43 (1986); Chester Brown, The Inherent Powers of International Courts and
Tribunals, 76 British Y.B. Int'l L. 195, 211-22 (2005); David D. Caron, Interim Measures of
Protection: Theory and Practice in Light of the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal, 46
Zeitschrift fiir auslandisches Offentliches Recht und Vélkerrecht 465, 476 (1986); Paola
Gaeta, Inherent Powers of International Courts and Tribunals, in Man's Inhumanity to
Man, Essays on International Law in Honour of Antonio Cassese 353 (2003).

Nuclear Tests (Australia v. France), 1974 I.C.J. 253, 259-60, para. 23 judgment of
December 20); Nuclear Tests (New-Zealand v. France), 1974 I.C.J. 457, 463, para. 23
(Judgment of December 20).

The theory of “implied powers” had been used in the context of international
organizations but it had only tentatively been mentioned in relation to the
justification of the binding nature of interim measures; Le Floch, supra note 3, at 404.
See also Gaeta, supra note 166, at 362-64.

28

© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
169) Le Floch, supra note 3, at 410.

170) Id. at 410-11.

171) E-Systems, Inc. v. Islamic Republic of Iran, Interim Award No. ITM 13-388-FT, February
4, 1983, 2 lran-U.S. C.T.R. 51, 52; RCA Global Communications, Inc. v. IsLamic Republic
of Iran., Interim Award No. ITM 29-160-1, October 31, 1983, 4 Iran-U.S. C.T.R. 5, 7.

172) Rockwell International Systems, Inc. v. Islamic Republic of Iran, supra note 54, at 369.

173) Charles N. Brower & Jason D. Brueschke, The Iran-United States Claims Tribunal 217
(1998).

174) Brown, supra note 166, at 239-42.

175) Caron, supra note 166, at 476. The author defines the stance of this minority view but
does not share its views.

176) Pope & Talbot, Inc. v. Canada, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Ruling by Tribunal on Claimant's
Motion for Interim Measures, January 7, 2000, available at
<www.naftaclaims.com/Disputes/Canada/Pope/PopeAwardOnInterimMeasuresMotio
n.pdf>.

177) Schreuer, supra note 20, at 759.

178) Contra Brown, supra note 166, at 236 (commenting on the decisions in Casado and
Maffezini, this author states that “these decisions should be regarded as incorrect.
Whilst international courts arguably possess an inherent power to grant provisional
measures that have binding force, this can be displaced by the clear terms of clause
contraire, such as that found in Article 47 of the ICSID Convention.”).

179) Cases cited supra notes 149-153.

180) Art. 1134 of NAFTA provides that “[a] Tribunal may order an interim measure of
protection” but also adds that “[flor the purposes of this paragraph, an order includes
a recommendation.” This suggests the possibility for arbitral tribunal to choose
between binding and non-binding interim measures. See also Oellers-Frahm, supra
note 57, at 958.

181) See supra note 101; Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 241.

182) See, e.g., the aforementioned ruling of the arbitral tribunal in Pope & Talbot, Inc. v.
Canada, supra note 176.

183) Cited in Schreuer, supra note 20, at 761. This element was recalled by the arbitral
tribunal in Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile,
supra note 51, para. 24. The first draft of the article of the ICSID Convention on interim
measures provided that “[t]he Tribunal may fix a penalty for failure to comply with
provisional measures” but this provision was withdrawn by “nearly unanimous vote”
of negotiating parties (cited in Caron, supra note 166, at 511).

184) Caron, supra note 166, at 511. Contra Laurent Levy, Les Astreintes et L'Arbitrage
International en Suisse, 19 A.S.A. Bull. 21 (2001) (suggesting that arbitrators have sucha
power).

185) Lew, Mistelis, & Kroll, supra note 58, at 788.

186) Agip S.p.A. v. Government of the People's Republic of Congo, supra note 132, para. 42.

187) Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 242-43.

188) Jeremy K. Sharpe, Drawing Adverse Inferences from the Non-Production of Evidence, 22
Arb. Int'l 549, 554-70 (2006).

189) Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 242, n. 20.

190) This was suggested in Mine v. Guinea, Decisions of December 4, 1985 (unreported),
where the arbitral tribunal noted in its decision on provisional measures that it “will
take into account in its award the effects of non-compliance by Mine with its
recommendations,” cited in the decision of the Tribunal de Premiére Instance of
Geneva, March 13, 1986, 4 ICSID Rep. 41. See also Schreuer, supra note 20, at 41.

191) Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 243-44.

192) Fisheries Jurisdiction (Federal Republic of Germany v. Iceland), 1974 I.C.J. Rep. 175
(Judgment of July 25).

193) C.H. Crockett, The Effects of Interim Measures of Protection in the International Court of
Justice, 7 Cal. W. Int'l J. 348, 372 (1977). See also Caron, supra note 166, at 411-12.

194) For instance, in LaGrand (Germany v. United States of America), supra note 138, para.
111, while considering the question “whether the United States has complied with the
obligation incumbent upon it as a result of the Order of March 3, 1999,” the Court
found “that the United States did not discharge this obligation” (para. 115) and
“violated its international legal obligation to comply with the Order” (para. 116). See
also para. 5 of the dispositif of the same judgment. In the case concerning Armed
Activities on the Territory of Congo, the I.C.J. found in the dispositif that “the Republic
of Uganda did not comply with the Order of the Court on provisional measures of July
1, 2000,” but no mention of the violation of an international obligation was made;
Armed Activities on the Territory of Congo (Democratic Republic of Congo v. Uganda),
dispositif para. 7 (Judgment of December 19, 2005), available at <www.icj-
cij.org/docket/files/116/10455.pdf>.

195) Santulli, supra note 18, at 443.

196) Watkins-Johnson Co., et al. v. Islamic Republic of Iran, et al., Award No. 429-370-1, July
28, 1989, 22 lran-U.S. C.T.R. 218, 253; Touche Ross and Co. v. Islamic Republic of Iran,
Award No. 197-480-1, October 30, 1985, 9 Iran-U.S. C.T.R. 284, 301. See also Brower &
Brueschke, supra note 173, at 240.

197) Oellers-Frahm, supra note 57, at 953.

29
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
198) Agip S.p.A. v. Government of the People's Republic of Congo, supra note 132, cited in 1
ICSID Rep. 311 (production of books, cards and registers); Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine,
ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No. 3, January 18, 2005, 11 ICSID Rep. 352,
358-60, paras. 24-36 (order to produce several kinds of documents).

199) Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania (No. 1), supra note 152,
para. 88 (preservation and no adverse step in relation to documents).

200) Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania (No. 3), supra note 152,
dispositif (recommendation that all parties refrain from disclosing to third parties the
documents related to the proceedings).

201) Ceskoslovenska Obchondi Banka, A.S. v. Slovak Republic, supra note 132 (suspension
of bankruptcy proceedings in domestic courts); Zhinvali Development Ltd. v. Republic
of Georgia, supra note 150, at 18, para. 45) (stay and suspension of proceedings ina
Georgia court and to bring the arbitral tribunal's recommendation to the attention of
the Georgia court to inform it about the exclusive jurisdiction of ICSID); SGS Société
Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, supra note 149, at 397
(recommendation that the Government of Pakistan do not “take any step to initiate a
complaint for contempt”); Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine (No. 1), supra note 136, para. 7
(“both parties shall refrain from, suspend and discontinue, any domestic proceedings,
judicial or other”); City Oriente Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal
Petroleos del Ecuador, supra note 64, para. 92 (decision that Ecuador and
Petroecuador should refrain from instituting or prosecuting “any judicial proceeding
or action of any nature whatsoever against or involving City Oriente Limited.”).

202) SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, supra note
149, at 397 (“the Tribunal recommends that the IsLamabad-based arbitration pending
between the Government of Pakistan and SGS be stayed until such time, if any, as this
Tribunal has issued an award declining jurisdiction over the present dispute, and the
award is no longer capable of being interpreted, revised or annulled pursuant to the
ICSID Convention.”).

203) Saipem S.p.A. v. People's Republic of Bangladesh, supra note 153, para. 183
(recommendation that Bangladesh “take the steps necessary to ensure that
Petrobangla refrain from encashing the Warranty Bond ... issued by Banque
Indosuez”); City Oriente Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos
del Ecuador, supra note 64, para. 92 (deciding that Ecuador and Petroecuador should
refrain from “demanding that City Oriente Limited pay any amounts as a result of the
application of the Law... Amending the Hydrocarbon Law”), Sergei Paushok, CJSC
Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra note 50, dispositif
para. 1 (suspension of payment of certain taxes); Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. Republic of
Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador, supra note 64, para. 79
(provisional measures restraining the respondent from demanding that the investor
“pay any amounts due pursuant to Law 42”).

204) Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Company v. Mongolia,
supra note 50, dispositif para. 3.

205) Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del
Ecuador, supra note 64, para. 79 (provisional measures restraining the Respondent
from “unilaterally amending, rescinding, terminating, or repudiating the Participation
Contracts or engaging in any other conduct which may directly or indirectly affect or
alter the legal situation under the Participation Contracts, as agreed upon by the
parties”).

206) Id. para. 2.

207) Id. para. 2.

208) City Oriente Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador,
supra note 64, para. 92 (deciding that Ecuador and Petroecuador should refrain from
“engaging in, starting or persisting in any other conduct that may directly affect or
alter the legal situation”); Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC
Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra note 50, dispositif para. 11 (deciding that “the
parties shall refrain ... from any action which could lead to further injury and
aggravation of the dispute between the parties”).

209) Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra
note 50, dispositif para. 4 (possibility for the claimant and the respondent to use
either an escrow account “in an internationally recognized financial or other
institution” or the “provision of a bank guarantee”).

210) Supra notes 88-98 and accompanying text.

211) Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 118 et seq.

212) This principle of priority is inserted in the ICC Rules according to which “the parties
may apply to any competent judicial authority” for interim measures “[blefore the file
is transmitted to the Arbitral Tribunal, and in appropriate circumstances even
thereafter” (art. 23(2)). See also LCIA Rules, art. 25(3).

213) UNCITRAL Rules, art. 26(1).

214) Id. art. 26(3).

215) Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 96. ICC Final Award 7589 of 1994, cited in Yesilirmak, supra
note 6, at 97 (“the opinion of the author relies on an ICC award decided under the
former 1988 ICC Arbitration Rules where the tribunal stated that an attachment ‘is
one [measure] that the Arbitral Tribunal does not have the power to grant.’ ”).

216) See, e.g., LCIA Rules, art. 25(1), (2).

30
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
217) Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, supra note
51, para. 15.

218) NAFTA, art. 1121(1)(b) and (2)(b), see supra note 83.

219) NAFTA, art. 1134. The 2004 U.S. Model BIT also provides that an arbitral tribunal “may
not order attachment” (art. 28(8)).

220) Pope & Talbot, Inc. v. Canada, supra note 176. See also Brown, supra note 166, at 239
(considering this provision of NAFTA, art. 1134 as a clause contraire).

221) Gaillard, supra note 16, at 226.

222) Id. at 226-27 (“dans la logique de la Convention, le principe d'exclusivité qui vaut
pour les mesures d'administration de la prevue par exemple, qui relevant de la seule
competence du tribunal arbitral, ne s'étend pas aux mesures d'assistance a
L'exécution qui demeurent le monopole des juridictions étatiques.”).

223) Which would necessarily constitute a qualification in the view of our previous
discussion on the effect of a combination of a “fork-in-the-road” clause with a request
for interim measures before domestic courts, see supra notes 84-87 and
accompanying text; to the extent, of course, that the request deals only with the
protection of the parties' “interests” and does not infringe the arbitral tribunal's
exclusivity as to the protection of parties' “rights.”

224) Similar measures are, however, possible at the post-award stage when an ad hoc
committee considers a stay of enforcement of the award in case of an annulment
procedure. The legal grounds are different from those on interim measures. A recent
example may be found inthe recent decision in Sempra Energy Int'l v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Annulment Proceeding, Decision on the
Argentine Republic's Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award,
March 5, 2009, para. 117, where the ad hoc committee granted Argentina the
continuation of the stay of enforcement of the award if it placed in escrow an amount
of U.S.$75 million; available at <http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Sempra-Stay.pdf>).

225) Quoted in Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile,
supra note 51, para. 88.

226) Id. para. 83.

227) Id. para. 86.

228) Id. para. 88.

229) Id. para. 86.

230) Tanzania Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. v. Independent Power Tanzania Ltd., supra note
29, para. 14.

231) Paul D. Friedland, Provisional Measures and ICSID Arbitration, 2 Arb. Int'l 335, 348
(1986) (commenting on the decision in Atlantic Triton where the tribunal refused to
grant pre-award security, the author considers that “[t]his result is undoubtedly
appropriate; indeed, it is difficult to imagine a standard for the award of pre-
judgment security that would be workable in ICSID arbitration. Attachments to secure
ultimate recovery are typically ordered by municipal courts only when the moving
party demonstrates (i) a true risk that the award may prove unenforceable, and (ii) a
likelihood of success on the merits of the dispute. In the ICSID context, the first
consideration would rarely be applicable where a government was the respondent,
and the second requirement would be impracticable regardless of which party was
the respondent because the international character and complexity of ICSID
arbitrations usually prevent any reasonable snap judgment as to which party will
prevail”).

232) ETI Euro Telecom Int'l N.V. v. Republic of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/28.

233) The facts are in the decision referred to infra note 234.

234) ETI Euro Telecom Int'l N.V. v. Republic of Bolivia and Empresa Nacional de
Telecommunicaciones Entel S.A., United States District Court SDNY, No. 08 Civ. 4247
(LTS)(FM), July 30, 2008, available at <www.asil.org/pdfs/ilib080814.pdf>.

235) ETI Euro Telecom Int'l N.V. v. Republic of Bolivia & another, [2008] EWCA (Civ) 880.

236) The district court indeed stated that “it is not necessary to address parties’
arguments as to whether the ICSID Convention prevents the Court from ordering the
prejudgment attachment of Entel's New York bank accounts,” supra note 234.

237) All the more precious in that it was authored by Lawrence Collins, L.J., an
authoritative scholar in the field of interim measures in international litigation, see
supra note 1.

238) ETI Euro Telecom Int'l N.V. v. Republic of Bolivia & another, supra note 235, para. 58.

239) Id. para. 108.

240) Id. para. 109.

241) Id. para. 1.

242) John Fordham, Disarming Litigation Terrorists, May 9, 2008, at 2, available at
<www.venezlon.co.uk/pdf/disarming_litigation.pdf>.

243) Mobil Cerro Negro Ltd. v. Petroleos De Venezuela S.A., Court of Appeal, Commercial
Court, March 18, 2008, [2008] EWHC (Comm) 532.

244) Fordham, supra note 242, at 1.

245) Venezuela Rails at Exoon Asset Freeze “Terrorism,” February 8, 2008, available at
<www.reuters.com/article/world News/idUSN0848021720080208>.

246) For instance, Bolivia's withdrawal from the ICSID Convention in 2007.

247) ICSID Rules, art. 39(1); ICSID Additional Facility Rules, art. 46(1). The ICSID Convention,
from which the ICSID Arbitration Rules derives, mentions the “measures which should
be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party” (art. 47).

31
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
248) UNCITRAL Rules, art. 26(1). ICC Rules are even broader and refer to “interim or
conservatory measures it [the tribunal] deems appropriate” (art. 23(1)). SCC Rules
simply refer to “a specific performance by the opposing party for the purpose of
securing the claim” (art. 31(1)).

249) “The Tribunal notes that the wording of Article 26(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules is not the
same as under the ICSID Convention; it leaves wider discretion to the Tribunal in the
awarding of provisional measures (‘any interim measures it deems necessary in
respect of the subject-matter of the dispute’) than under Article 47 of the ICSID Rules
(‘provisional measures for the preservation of its rights’).” Sergei Paushok, CJSC
Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra note 50, para. 36.

250) Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, supra note
51, para. 15.

251) Id.

252) Id. See also id. para. 83, where the tribunal underlined the “very broad and varied
nature of the possible provisional measures available within the ICSID regime and ...
the willingness of the framers of the applicable texts to forswear a precise list of the
measures available to the Tribunal.”

253) For an overview of these measures, see Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 204-319.

254) Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania (No. 1), supra note 152,
para. 84 (“It is uncontroversial that the Arbitral Tribunal's powers under Article 47
include the power to recommend the preservation of evidence, including documents.
This is one of the most common forms of interim relief.”).

255) Tanzania Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. v. Independent Power Tanzania Ltd., supra note
29, para. 16 (“We do not go so far as to conclude that ‘provisional measures’ under
Rule 39 can never include recommending the performance of a contract in whole orin
part.”).

256) Zhinvali Development Ltd. v. Republic of Georgia, supra note 150, at 18, para. 45,
where the arbitral tribunal recommended “that the Georgia court stay and suspend
its proceedings insofar as any issues pending before the Tribunal were concerned.”

257) Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania (No. 1), supra note 152,
para. 100.

258) Id. See also Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Decision
on Provisional Measures, April 6, 2007, para. 45, available at
<http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Phoenix-ProvisionalMeasures.pdf>.

259) ICSID Rules, art. 39(1): “a party may request ... provisional measures for the
preservation of its rights ... The request shall specify ... the circumstances that require
such measures.” See also ICSID Convention, art. 4, referring to both “rights” and
“circumstances.” The ICSID Additional Facility Rules refer only to the “preservation of
rights” (art. 46(1)).

260) UNCITRAL Rules, art. 26(1). In identical terms, the ICC Rules only mention measures
that the tribunal “deems appropriate” (art. 23(1)).

261) Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 175 (“the collective requirements to grant provisional
measures are: (1) prima facie establishment of jurisdiction; (2) prima facie
establishment of case; (3) urgency; (4) imminent danger, serious or substantial
prejudice ifthe measure requested is not granted; and (5) proportionality.”). The
tribunal in Sergei Paushok v. Mongolia did not quote this previous work.

262) Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra
note 50, para. 45.

263) Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, supra note
51, para. 5 (original emphasis).

264) Oellers-Frahm, supra note 57, at 953. See also Victor Pey Casado and President Allende
Foundation v. Republic of Chile, supra note 51, para. 6.

265) Fisheries Jurisdiction (United Kingdom v. Iceland), 1972 I.C.J. 12, 16 (Order of August 17)
(Request for the Indication of Interim Measures of Protection); Fisheries Jurisdiction
(Republic of Germany v. Iceland), 1972 |.C.J. 30, 34 (Order of August 17) (Request for the
Indication of Interim Measures of Protection).

266) Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United
States of America), 1984 I.C.J. 169, 179, para. 24 (Order of May 10) (Request for the
Indication of Provisional Measures) (“Whereas on a request for provisional measures
the Court need not, before deciding whether or not to indicate them, finally satisfy
itself that it has jurisdiction on the merits of the case, or, as the case may be, that an
objection taken to jurisdiction is well-founded, yet it ought not to indicate such
measures unless the provisions invoked by the Applicant appear, prima facie, to
afford a basis on which the jurisdiction of the Court might be founded.”). See also J.G.
Merrills, Interim Measures of Protection in the Recent Jurisprudence of the International
Court of Justice, 44 Int'l & Comp. L.Q. 90, 91 et seq. (1995).

267) Brower & Brueschke, supra note 173, at 218-22; Caron, note 166, at 535-36.

268) Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, supra note
51, paras. 8-10 (relying on the Fisheries case); Occidental Petroleum Corp. and
Occidental Exploration & Production Co. v. Ecuador, supra note 155, para 55; City
Oriente Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador, supra
note 64, para. 50. See also Yaung Chi Oo Trading Ltd. v. Government of the Union of
Myanmar, ASEAN I.D. Case No. ARB/01/1, Procedural Order No. 2, Request for
Provisional Measures, February 27, 2002, 8 ICSID Rep. 456, 459, para. 12 (relying on the
I.C.J. case on the Legality of Use of Force).

32
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
269) Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra
note 50, paras. 47-54 (relying on the Nicaragua case).

270) Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 175-76.

271) David D. Caron et al., The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: ACommentary 536 (2006)
(pointing out about UNCITRAL arbitration that, “with respect to interim measures, the
jurisdictional issue is not likely to be as important for ad hoc arbitration, which
typically deals with tailor-made arbitration clauses or agreements, as for the World
Court or for a large treaty-based settlement process.”).

272) Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra
note 50, para. 52.

273) Inthe Anglo-lranian Oil Co. (United Kingdom v. Iran), 1951 I.C.J. 89, 93 (Order of July 5)
(Request for the Indication of Interim Measures of Protection), the I.C.J. recognized
that “the indication of such measures in no way prejudges the question of the
jurisdiction of the Court to deal with the merits of the case and leaves unaffected the
right of the Respondent to submit arguments against such jurisdiction.” See also
Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine (No. 1), supra note 136, para. 6 (“the ‘recommendation’ of
provisional measures does not in any way prejudge the question of jurisdiction. It is,
therefore, independently of the present Order on provisional measures that this
Tribunal will have to rule on the jurisdictional objections raised by the Respondent.”).

274) ICSID Convention, art. 36(3).

275) Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile supra note
51, para. 11. See also Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa
Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador, supra note 64, para. 39 (“It is not enough for the
Tribunal that the Secretary-General has found that the dispute is not manifestly
outside the jurisdiction of the Centre and has therefore registered the Request for
Arbitration under Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 6(1)(b) of the
Institution Rules.”).

276) Schreuer, supra note 20, at 765. See also Brower & Goodman, supra note 81, at 431,
452-56 (and noting further that “the fact that the Secretary-General, in registering the
Request for Arbitration, has found the dispute not to be ‘manifestly outside the
jurisdiction of the Centre,’ although not ipso jure determinative of the tribunal's
jurisdictional entitlement to act under Convention Article 47, must give rise toa
presumption, theoretically rebuttable but in practical terms virtually immune to
rebuttal that its jurisdiction exists prima facie.”).

277) Yesilirmak, supra note 6, at 177.

278) Oellers-Frahm, supra note 57, at 938; Le Floch, supra note 3, at 101-03.

279) It is unclear whether both the decisions in Maffezini and Casado implement this test.
See infra notes 291-294 and accompanying text.

280) Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra
note 50, para. 55.

281) See also Caron, supra note 166, at 490.

282) Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra
note 50, para. 55.

283) Asimilar test has been inserted in the 2004 U.S. Model BIT, see art. 28(4)(c).

284) See discussions in Veijo Heiskanen, Frivolous’ Claims, 2 Transnat'l Disp. Mgmt 1, 1-10
(No. 5, 2005).

285) This variable intensity has also been highlighted in the separate opinion of Judge
Abraham to the I.C.J. order in the Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay case, where Judge
Abraham underlined that: “[l]'on peut exiger du demandeur qu'il établisse prima
facie le bien-fondé de ses prétentions sur le fond du différend ... C'est une approche
plutot exigeante ... On peut aussi se satisfaire du constat que le droit revendiqué
n'est pas manifestement inexistant, et qu'il n'est pas manifestement exclu... Le
critere du fumus boni juris céde alors la place a celui du fumus non mali juris. Mais ce
sont la, a vrai dire, des nuances, et il existe toute une variété de degrés
intermédiaires ... L'essentiel, a mes yeux, est que le juge soit convaincu d'étre en
présence d'une argumentation qui, sur le fond, présente un caractére suffisamment
sérieux” (Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentina v. Uruguay) (Order of July 13,
2006) (Requests for the Indication of Provisional Measures), para. 10 (Separate
Opinion of Judge Abraham), available at <www.icj-
cij.org/docket/files/135/11240.pdf>). See also CDC Group plc v. Republic of Seychelles,
ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14, Decision on Whether to Continue Stay and Order, July 14,
2004, 11 ICSID Rep. 225, 228, para. 13 (“While some national jurisdictions require asa
basis for injunctive orders, conservatory measures or stay that the underlying
substantive application meet some standard of probability of success, until now this
has not been required in international proceedings.”).

33
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
286) Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra
note 50, para. 56 (“[T]he Tribunal wishes to stress that in no way does that ruling imply
that the Tribunal would reach a similar conclusion on the merits of the case.”);
Biwater Gauff (No. 3), supra note 152, para. 165 (“The Arbitral Tribunal is obviously not
yet ina position to form any views whatsoever on the merits of the parties' cases, and
it has been careful not to prejudge any issues of fact or law in the formulation of this
procedural order.”); Tanzania Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. v. Independent Power
Tanzania Ltd., supra note 29, para. 6 (“[W]e observe that both Parties concentrated a
great deal of attention in their written and oral submissions on the ‘merits’ of the
dispute. ... we think it neither appropriate nor indeed possible for us at this stage to
form or express any concluded view on the merits.”).

287) Maffezini v. Spain, supra note 103, para. 10; Plama Consortium Ltd. v. Republic of
Bulgaria, supra note 151, para. 38; OPC v. Ecuador, supra note 155, para. 59; Sergel
Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra note 50,
para. 39; Phoenix v. Czech Republic, supra note 258, para. 33.

288) Railroad Development Corp. v. Republic of Guatemala, supra note 15, para. 64.
(pointing out that “Article 47 of the ICSID Convention does not specify any particular
circumstances”).

289) The cumulative character of the conditions should be underlined. For instance, in OPC
v. Ecuador, supra note 155, para. 87, the arbitral tribunal pointed out first that “an
order for provisional measures will only be made where such measures are found to
be necessary and urgent” and further considered that “[t]here is no necessity or
urgency” (emphasis added).

290) Schreuer, supra note 20, at 773.

291) Maffezini v. Spain, supra note 103, para. 13. The tribunal stated (para. 14) that “[a]n
example of an existing right would be an interest in a piece of property, the
ownership of which isin dispute. A provisional measure could be ordered to require
that the property not be sold or alienated before the final award of the arbitral
tribunal. Such an order would preserve the status quo of the property, thus preserving
the rights of the party in the property.”

292) Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, supra note
51, para. 45.

293) Id. para. 45.

294) Id. para. 46. This passage was quoted in OPC v. Ecuador, supra note 155, para. 64.

295) OPC v. Ecuador, supra note 155, para. 64.

296) Id. para. 63.

297) For an overview of the I.C.J. case law on this issue, see Oellers-Frahm, supra note 57, at
938-39; Merrills, supra note 266, at 100.

298) Plama Consortium Ltd. v. Republic of Bulgaria, supra note 151, para. 40.

299) Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, Procedural Order No. 1, supra note 152, paras. 84-88.

300) EnCana Corp. v. Republic of Ecuador, supra note 37, para. 17.

301) Schreuer, supra note 20, at 776-77.

302) Tanzania Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. v. Independent Power Tanzania Ltd., supra note
29, para. 14.

303) For the |.C.J., see Oellers-Frahm, supra note 57, at 939-40.

304) Caron etal., supra note 271, at 537.

305) Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra
note 50, para. 68.

306) Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, Procedural Order No. 3, supra note 152, paras. 146.

307) Plama Consortium Ltd. v. Republic of Bulgaria, supra note 151, para. 46.

308) OPC v. Ecuador, supra note 155, para. 98.

309) Although it has no effect de plano on investment arbitration frameworks, it is
noteworthy to mention that urgency is no longer a separate condition under the new
UNCITRAL Model Law (supra note 34). Art. 17(a)(1) indeed provides that “[t]he party
requesting an interim measure ... shall satisfy the arbitral tribunal that (a) [hlarm not
adequately reparable by an award of damages is likely to result if the measure is not
ordered, and such harm substantially outweighs the harm that is likely to result to the
party against whom the measure Is directed if the measure is granted.”

310) Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania (No. 1), supra note 152, para. 109.

311) Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, supra note
51, para. 5.

312) Saipem S.p.A. v. People's Republic of Bangladesh, supra note 153, para. 175.

313) Railroad Development Corp. v. Republic of Guatemala, supra note 15, para. 34.

314) Passage through the Great Belt (Finland v. Denmark), 1991 |.C.J. 12, 17, para. 23 (Order
of July 29) (Request for the Indication of Provisional Measures).

315) OPC v. Ecuador, supra note 155, para. 89.

316) Suchas, e.g., in NAFTA, Pope & Talbot v. Canada, supra note 176; Marvin Roy Feldman
Karpa v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1, Procedural Order No. 2
Concerning a Request for Provisional Measures and the Schedule of the Proceeding,
May 3, 2000, para. 5, available at
<http://naftaclaims.com/Disputes/Mexico/Feldman/FeldmanProceduralOrder2.pdf>.

317) OPC v. Ecuador, supra note 155, para. 179.

318) Id. para. 86.

319) Id. para. 81.

34
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
320) Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra
note 50, para. 79.

321) OPC v. Ecuador, supra note 155, para. 82.

322) See James Crawford, The International Law Commission's Articles on State
Responsibility: Introduction, Text and Commentaries (2002).

323) Supra notes 58-62.

324) Phoenix v. Czech Republic, supra note 258, para. 43 (“The Tribunal does not see what
right of the Claimant such a vague and general request is deemed to protect. It
should be emphasized that this last request is an application for disclosure of
unspecified evidence rather than a proper request for provisional measures. This
seems to be analogous to what is sometimes called a ‘fishing expedition.””).

325) Tanzania Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. v. Independent Power Tanzania Ltd., supra note
29, para. 12.

326) Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Co. and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Co. v. Mongolia, supra
note 50, para. 90.

327) Phoenix v. Czech Republic, supra note 258, para. 37.

328) Le Floch, supra note 3, at 452.

329) For the |.C.J., see Bekker, supra note 74, at 32 (referring to the statement of the I.C.J.
pointing out “the increasing tendency of parties to request the indication of
provisional measures”).

35
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.

Kluwer Arbitration is made available for personal use only. All content is protected by copyright and other intellectual property
laws. No part of this service or the information contained herein may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, or
used for advertising or promotional purposes, general distribution, creating new collective works, or for resale, without prior
written permission of the publisher.

If you would like to know more about this service, visit www.kluwerarbitration.com or contact our Sales staff at
sales@kluwerlaw.com or call +31 (0)172 64 1562.

@ Wolters Kluwer KluwerArbitration

36
© 2019 Kluwer Law International, a Wolters Kluwer Company. All rights reserved.
