ALL rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Copyright @ 2009. Brill | Nijhoff.

Interim Measures: An Arbitrator’s Provisional Views

L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.*
Chair and Senior Partner, Ogilvy Renault LLP
Montreal, Canada

INTRODUCTION

The issue of interim measures in investor-State arbitration is of interest to
arbitrators and practitioners. It is a topic in motion. In this article, I will
address the following facets of the issue:

1. Are interim measures available in investor-State arbitration to the
same extent as in international commercial arbitration?

2. In what circumstances are interim measures recommended (or-
dered) in investor-State arbitrations?

3. Are interim measures sought against a State in an investor-State
arbitration any different than measures sought against a non-State

party?
In seeking to shed some light on the issue, I will refer to both the

literature on the topic and my own experience as an arbitrator in investor-
State arbitrations.

AVAILABILITY OF INTERIM MEASURES IN INVESTOR-STATE
ARBITRATIONS: THE POWER OF CONSENT

The availability of interim measures in international arbitration, even where
a State is respondent, is now well-settled. A tribunal’s jurisdiction to order
provisional measures is, like the parties’ arbitration agreement itself, a
function of the parties’ consent. When opting for arbitration, be it in the
context of an investor-State dispute or a purely commercial one, the parties

*With thanks to my colleagues, Alison FitzGerald and Renée Thériault,
members of Ogilvy Renault’s International Arbitration Team, for their assistance in
preparing this article.

47

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 6/19/2019 12:35 AM via UNIVERSITEIT LEIDEN

AN: 308329 ; Rovine, Arthur W., Fordham University.; Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation
: The Fordham Papers 2008

Account: s2985883.main.ehost
ALL rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Copyright @ 2009. Brill | Nijhoff.

48 Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation

have complete freedom to shape the scope of a tribunal’s jurisdiction to
order provisional relief. And while parties will be well advised to draft their
arbitration agreement carefully in this regard, they are always free to carve
out concurrent jurisdiction of the courts in connection with such relief.

The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID) Convention and Arbitration Rules, which represent the quintessen-
tial framework for investor-State arbitration, expressly address the operation
of the parties’ consent. Article 26 of the convention, provides that
‘“‘[c]onsent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless
otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion of
any other remedy.”’ Regarding provisional measures specifically, Article 47
of the convention states: “‘Except as the parties otherwise agree, the
Tribunal may, if it considers that the circumstances so require, recommend
any provisional measures which should be taken to preserve the respective
rights of either party.”’

These two provisions have been the subject of much debate, as they
effectively deem an ICSID tribunal’s jurisdiction to order provisional relief
to be exclusive. The burden is on the parties to expressly indicate otherwise.
ICSID Arbitration Rule 39(6) makes that very clear: ‘‘Nothing in this Rule
shall prevent the parties, provided that they have so stipulated in the
agreement recording their consent, from requesting any judicial or other
authority to order provisional measures, prior to or after the institution of
the proceeding, for the preservation of their respective rights and interests.”’

The exclusivity of an ICSID tribunal’s power to order provisional relief
is a unique feature of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. Indeed, under other
recognized arbitration frameworks, it is presumed (be it explicitly or
implicitly) that courts retain the power to order such relief unless otherwise
specified.! Chapter 11 of the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), also designed for investor-State arbitration, provides an interest-
ing contrast. In its early iterations in 1992, NAFTA drafters had in fact
stipulated that a tribunal could not order provisional measures.? The
availability of provisional measures under NAFTA Chapter 11 would
eventually be specified under Article 1134. And while initial versions of this
provision referred to the availability of provisional measures for the
protection of the tribunal’s “‘jurisdictional exclusivity,’ this language was
eventually dropped.* Today, Article 1134 reads, in relevant part, as follows:
‘A Tribunal may order an interim measure of protection to preserve the

' See, e.g., E. Gaillard & J. Savage eds., Fouchard Gaillard Goldman on International
Commercial Arbitration § 1320 (1999).

* See Meg Kinnear et al., Investment Disputes Under NAFTA: An Annotated Guide to
NAFTA Chapter 11 1134-41 (2006).

3 Td.

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 6/19/2019 12:35 AM via UNIVERSITEIT LEIDEN

AN: 308329 ; Rovine, Arthur W., Fordham University.; Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation
: The Fordham Papers 2008

Account: s2985883.main.ehost
ALL rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Copyright @ 2009. Brill | Nijhoff.

Interim Measures 49

rights of a disputing party, or to ensure that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is
made fully effective, including an order to preserve evidence in the
possession or control of a disputing party or to protect the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction.”

Another unique feature of ICSID and in particular Rule 39 is that it
refers to the tribunal’s power to “‘recommend”’ provisional measures. This
language is used in the very first paragraph of Rule 39, which states, ‘‘At any
time after the institution of the proceeding, a party may request that
provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be recommended by
the Tribunal.”’

The reality is that once the parties have provided their consent, at least
in the context of an ICSID arbitration, the tribunal will have the required
jurisdiction to order provisional relief in accordance with the terms of Rule
39. An ICSID tribunal jurisdiction is in fact wide-reaching, far more than a
tribunal operating under NAFTA Chapter Eleven. For instance, an ICSID
tribunal may recommend provisional measures on its Own initiative or
recommend measures other than those specified in a request. Furthermore,
a tribunal may at any time modify or revoke its recommendations.

One might be inclined to think that such broad powers, especially when
exercised sua sponte, are potentially incompatible with the involvement of a
sovereign State. There may also be a heightened sense of méfiance on the
part of States due to the fact that an ICSID tribunal has the power to
recommend provisional measures before it has definitely ruled on its
jurisdiction over the dispute: a finding of prima facie jurisdiction will
suffice.* And only recently, in 2006, Rule 39 was revised to allow requests for
provisional measures on an expedited basis as soon as a dispute is registered
with ICSID, that is, even before the tribunal is constituted.®

While the scope of an ICSID tribunal’s power to order provisional
measures has widened over time, it is significant that the issue of State
sovereignty was at the forefront of the drafters’ minds when Rule 39 was
initially crafted. Their concern in respect of State sovereignty provides the
explanation for the careful wording of Rule 39, premised as it is on a
tribunal’s power to “‘recommend”’ provisional measures, as opposed to the
power to “order,” or language to that effect. As noted by Redfern and

* See, e.g., Holiday Inns v. Morocco, 1978/79 ICSID Ann. Rep. 5, cited in ALR.
Parra, ““The Practices and Experience of ICSID,”’ in Conservatory and Provisional
Measures in International Arbitration 37, 42 (ICC Publication No. 519, 1993).

> Paragraph 5 of Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides as follows: “‘If
a party makes a request pursuant to (1) before the constitution of the Tribunal, the
Secretary-General shall, on the application of either party, fix time limits for the
parties to present observations on the request, so that the request and observations
may be considered by the Tribunal promptly upon its constitution.”

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 6/19/2019 12:35 AM via UNIVERSITEIT LEIDEN

AN: 308329 ; Rovine, Arthur W., Fordham University.; Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation
: The Fordham Papers 2008

Account: s2985883.main.ehost
ALL rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Copyright @ 2009. Brill | Nijhoff.

50 ~~ Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation

Hunter, “‘[t]he use of the word ‘recommend’ in this context stems from the
concern of the drafters of the ICSID Convention to be seen as respectful of
national sovereignty by not granting powers to private tribunals to order a
state to do or not do something on a purely provisional basis.’’® Schreuer
informs us that “‘a conscious decision was made not to grant the tribunal the
power to order binding provisional measures.’’”

In the fullness of time, however, this concern of the drafters of the
convention was set aside by less “‘respectful’’ ICSID tribunals. For instance,
in the case of Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, the tribunal stated
in no uncertain terms: ““The Tribunal’s authority to rule on provisional
measures is not less binding than that of a final award. Accordingly, for the
purposes of this order, the tribunal deems the word ‘recommend’ to be of
equivalent value as the word ‘order’.’’>

The issue of whether provisional measures are binding on States was
long debated in the International Court of Justice (ICJ) as well. In the
landmark LaGrand case initiated by Germany against the United States, it
was argued by the latter that an IC] order on provisional measures, made
pursuant to Article 41 of the ICJ Statute, was not binding. This argument
was rejected by the IC] in the following terms:

The context in which Article 41 has to be seen within the Statute is to
prevent the Court from being hampered in the exercise of its functions
because the respective rights of the parties to a dispute before the
Court are not preserved. It follows from the object and purpose of the
Statute, as well as from the terms of Article 41 when read in their
context, that the power to indicate provisional measures entails that
such measures should be binding, inasmuch as the power in question is
based on the necessity, when the circumstances call for it, to safeguard,
and to avoid prejudice to, the rights of the parties as determined by the
final judgment of the Court. The contention that provisional measures

® Alan Redfern & Martin Hunter, Law and Practice of International Commercial
Arbitration J 7-12 (4th ed. 2004).

? The ICSID Convention: A Commentary 758 (2001), cited in Redfern & Martin,
supra note 6.

8 Decision on Request for Provisional Measures (Oct. 28, 1999), 16 ICSID Rev.—
Foreign Inv. Lj. 212, at {9 (2001), cited in Redfern & Martin, supra note 6. See also
Tokios Tokeles v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No. 1, § 4
(July 1, 2003): “It is to be recalled that, according to a well-established principle laid
down by the jurisprudence of the ICSID tribunals, provisional measures ‘recom-
mended’ by an ICSID tribunal are legally compulsory; they are in effect ‘ordered’ by
the tribunal, and the parties are under a legal obligation to comply with them.”’

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 6/19/2019 12:35 AM via UNIVERSITEIT LEIDEN

AN: 308329 ; Rovine, Arthur W., Fordham University.; Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation
: The Fordham Papers 2008

Account: s2985883.main.ehost
ALL rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Copyright @ 2009. Brill | Nijhoff.

Interim Measures 5]

indicated under Article 41 might not be binding would be contrary to
the object and purpose of that Article.%

INTERIM MEASURES IN INVESTOR-STATE ARBITRATIONS: A FEW
EXAMPLES

It is clear that interim relief is available in investor-State arbitrations. I will
now provide examples that illustrate different circumstances where interim
measures were actually ordered or denied.

Rule 39 does not specify the kinds of measures that a tribunal may
order, nor does it establish criteria for granting such measures. Paragraph 1
of Rule 39 simply states that ‘‘a party may request that provisional measures
for the preservation of its rights be recommended by the tribunal’ and that
any such request “‘specify the rights to be preserved, the measures the
recommendation of which is requested, and the circumstances that require
[the] measures.”’

By contrast, Rule 26 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides with
greater particularity that the tribunal may order any interim measures “‘it
deems necessary in respect of the subject-matter of the dispute, including
for the conservation of goods forming the subject-matter in dispute, such as
ordering their deposit with a third person or the sale of perishable goods.”’
Similarly, NAFTA Article 1134 provides that a tribunal constituted to hear
an investment dispute under Chapter 11 of NAFTA may order interim
measures to preserve the rights of a disputing party, “‘including an order to
preserve evidence in the possession or control of a disputing party or to
protect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.’’!°

Several concepts emerge from a review of these rules. /%rst, an
unspoken requirement of a request for interim measures is that the tribunal
seized of the request have prima facie jurisdiction over the dispute. This
principle is now well established on the basis of IC], Iran-United States
Claims Tribunal, and ICSID decisions and awards. Although the necessity of
demonstrating prima facie jurisdiction continues to be challenged in ad hoc
arbitrations, there is, in my view, no principled basis upon which to
distinguish between ad hoc and institutional arbitrations in regard to this

9 LaGrand Case (Federal Republic of Germany v. United States), 2001 ILC.
104, at | 102 (June 27), cited in D.F. Donovan, ““The Scope and Enforceability of
Provisional Measures in International Commercial Arbitration: A Survey of Jurisdic-
tions, The Work of UNCITRAL and Proposals for Moving Forward,”’ in A.J. van den
Berg ed., International Commercial Arbitration: Important Contemporary Questions 119
(2002).

' Article 1134 also contains an important exclusion precluding a tribunal from
ordering attachment or enjoining the application of the measure alleged to
constitute a breach of NAFTA.

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 6/19/2019 12:35 AM via UNIVERSITEIT LEIDEN

AN: 308329 ; Rovine, Arthur W., Fordham University.; Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation
: The Fordham Papers 2008

Account: s2985883.main.ehost
ALL rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Copyright @ 2009. Brill | Nijhoff.

52 Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation

threshold requirement. The threshold is a relatively low one, and an
application for interim measures will not be denied simply because a
jurisdictional challenge has been raised.

As explained by the IC] in the Msheries Jurisdiction case (1972), a tribunal
will have prima facie jurisdiction when ‘‘the provision in an instrument
emanating from both parties to the dispute appears, prima facie, to afford a
possible basis on which the jurisdiction of the Court might be founded.’’!!
Judge Schwebel has pointed out that the precise meaning of “‘might’’ in this
context, that is, whether “‘might”’ means “‘possibly might”’ or “‘might well”
or ‘“‘might probably,’ is subject to controversy.'* Nevertheless, whatever
“might”? might mean, this threshold falls far short of requiring a party to
demonstrate a likelihood of success on the merits.

The second concept apparent from this review is the class or category of
interim relief available from arbitral tribunals. Interim measures are
generally designed to fulfill one of three purposes: (1)to facilitate the
conduct of arbitral proceedings, (2) to facilitate the enforcement of a future
award, or (3)to preserve the status quo.!* In certain civilian jurisdictions, the
réferé procedure may also be available to assist creditors in rapidly securing
enforcement of their rights, either fully or in part, where those rights are
not seriously in dispute.'* The first two classes of relief are intended to
ensure the efficiency and efficacy of the arbitral procedure and may
comprise measures related to the preservation of evidence, the attendance
of witnesses, or security for costs, among others. These kinds of measures
are critical to a party’s ability to secure meaningful relief, consistent with the
parties’ original arbitration agreement. The more controversial measures
are often those with a protective or conservatory purpose, where a party
seeks to preserve the status quo ante.

As mentioned earlier, Rule 39(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules
specifies that a party may request “‘provisional measures /or the preservation of

'! Fisheries Jurisdiction Case (Federal Republic of Germany v. Iceland), Interim
Protection, Order of Aug. 17, 1972, 1972 I.CJ. 30, at { 18; Fisheries Jurisdiction Case
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland v. Iceland), Interim
Protection, Order of Aug. 17, 1972, 1972 L.C.J. 12, at (17. See also Armed Activities
on the territory of the Condo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic Republic of
Congo v. Rwanda), Provisional Measures, Order of July 10, 2002, 2002 LC.J. 241,
{1 58; Case Concerning Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentina v. Uruguay),
Request for the Indication of Provisional Measures, Order of July 13, 2006, IC.
Reports of Judgments, Advisory Opinions and Orders No. 915, {57 (Oct. 2007).

2 Lawrence Collins, Essays in International Litigation and the Conflict of Laws 175
(1994), citing Judge Schwebel in Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against
Nicaragua case, 1984 I.C.J. 169, at 207.

'S See Kinnear et al., supra note 2, at 1134-2—1134-3.

'4 Gaillard & Savage eds., supra note 1, at {{ 1339-40.

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 6/19/2019 12:35 AM via UNIVERSITEIT LEIDEN

AN: 308329 ; Rovine, Arthur W., Fordham University.; Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation
: The Fordham Papers 2008

Account: s2985883.main.ehost
ALL rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Copyright @ 2009. Brill | Nijhoff.

Interim Measures 53

its rights [emphasis added].’’ This language has been interpreted by arbitral
tribunals as requiring that the rights in issue exist at the time the application
is made. The tribunal in Maffezini v. Spain stated concisely that “*[t]he use of
the present tense implies that such rights must exist at the time of the
request, must not be hypothetical, nor are ones to be created (sic) in the
future.’’!°

In that case, the applicant respondent was seeking an interim measure
requiring the claimant to post a guaranty or bond in the amount of the costs
that the respondent expected to incur in defending the case. The tribunal
rejected the application on the ground the alleged rights were based on
“hypothetical situations,’’ namely whether the respondent would win the
case and whether the tribunal would deem the claimant’s case to be of such
a nature as to require the claimant to pay the respondent’s costs and
expenses.!® The tribunal concluded that granting the requested relief in
those circumstances would have risked prejudging the claimant’s case.!”

Interim measures are intended to guarantee the protection of rights
whose existence might be jeopardized in the absence of such measures.!®
This is not to say, however, that the rights for which interim protection is
sought need be proven.!* To be clear, at the interim measures stage of a
dispute the tribunal need only deal with the nature of the rights claimed,
not with their actual existence or the merits of the allegations of their

8 Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Procedural Order
No. 2, {13 (Oct 28, 1999).

6 Td. at YJ 15-21.

7 Td. at J 21.

'8 See Occidental Petroleum Corporation, Occidental Petroleum and Produc-
tion Company v. The Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on
Provisional Measures, { 60 (Aug. 17, 2007). The author of this article is presently the
chairman of the tribunal in this case. The rights in issue concern the claimants’
alleged right to specific performance of their oil and gas concession. The claimants
sought interim measure of protection in connection with this alleged right. The
request for interim measures was denied.

'9 See LaGrand Case (Federal Republic of Germany v. United States), 2001 I.C,J.
104, at | 102 (June 27) (‘‘It follows from the object and purpose of the Statute, as
well as from the terms of Article 41 when read in their context, that the power to
indicate provisional measures entails that such measures should be_ binding,
inasmuch as the power in question is based on the necessity, when the circumstances
call for it, to safeguard, and to avoid prejudice to, the rights of the parties as
determined by the final judgment of the Court.’’). See also Victor Pey Casado v.
Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision, { 49 (Sept. 25, 2001). The tribunal in
Pey Casado observed on the basis of the LaGrand reasoning that prior to rendering
final judgment, the alleged rights for which protection is provisionally sought may
not be considered proven, real or actual. The English translation of the original
French and Spanish language versions of this decision is available in 6 JCSID Rep. 375
(2004).

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 6/19/2019 12:35 AM via UNIVERSITEIT LEIDEN

AN: 308329 ; Rovine, Arthur W., Fordham University.; Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation
: The Fordham Papers 2008

Account: s2985883.main.ehost
ALL rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Copyright @ 2009. Brill | Nijhoff.

54 Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation

violation. This was the approach adopted by the tribunal in Vector Pey Casado
v. Chile, where the tribunal stated,

For its part, the Tribunal can neither prejudge nor even, to put it
correctly, ‘““assume in an anticipatory fashion: . . .”’ It must therefore
reason, at this preliminary stage of the arbitration process, on the basis
not of “‘assumptions”’ but of hypotheses, in particular that by which it may
come to recognise its own jurisdiction on the substance of the case, and
in such a case, the hypothesis whereby the rights that the decision may
recognise for one or the other of the parties in question could be
placed in danger or compromised by the absence of provisional
measures.”°

The rights for which interim protection is sought must also reasonably
relate to the “‘rights in dispute.’’*! In this regard the tribunal in Plama
Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria stated that

[t]he rights to be preserved must relate to the requesting party’s ability
to have its claims and requests for relief in the arbitration fairly
considered and decided by the arbitral tribunal and for any arbitral
decision which grants to the Claimant the relief it seeks to be effective
and able to be carried out.*?

In Plama, the claimant had applied for an interim relief order recommend-
ing, among other relief, that the respondent immediately discontinue and/
or cause to be discontinued all pending proceedings relating to the
arbitration, and refrain from bringing or participating in any future
proceedings before the Bulgarian courts relating in any way to the
arbitration.?? The tribunal determined that because the claims and relief
sought by the claimant in the dispute were limited to damages, the scope of
the rights relating to the dispute that deserved protection by way of
provisional measures was necessarily also limited to the damage claims.*4
The tribunal summarized its conclusions in regard to the claimant’s request

*° Victor Pey Casado v. Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision, { 46 (Sept.
25, 2001). The English translation of the original French and Spanish language
versions of this decision is available in 6 JCSID Rep. 375 (2004).

71 See Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/
03/24, Order, { 40 (Sept. 6, 2005). See also Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID
Case No. ARB/97/7, Procedural Order No. 2, §§ 123-125 (Oct. 28, 1999).

2 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/
24, Order, at {40 (Sept. 6, 2005).

*3 Td. at J 2.

*4 Td. at (41.

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 6/19/2019 12:35 AM via UNIVERSITEIT LEIDEN

AN: 308329 ; Rovine, Arthur W., Fordham University.; Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation
: The Fordham Papers 2008

Account: s2985883.main.ehost
ALL rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Copyright @ 2009. Brill | Nijhoff.

Interim Measures 55

for an order recommending that the respondent discontinue all pending
proceedings as follows:

The Tribunal is reluctant to recommend to a State that it order its
courts to deny third parties the right to pursue their judicial remedies
and is not satisfied that if it did so in this case, Respondent would have
the power to impose its will on an independent judiciary. While under
general principles of public international law, a state is responsible for
actions of its courts, Claimant’s Request for Urgent Provisional
Measures is not based on a claim of denial of justice by those courts for
which relief is sought.”

These cases clearly show that the circumstances in which provisional
relief will be ordered to preserve the status quo pending resolution of the
outcome of the dispute are quite narrowly circumscribed.

This brings me to the thzrd and last concept emerging from my review of
the rules, that is, interim measures are only to be granted where they are
necessary to preserve a party’s rights; or where there is an urgent need for
interim relief in order to avoid irreparable harm from befalling the
requesting party. In the words of a former president of the IC], Jumeney de
Aréchaga, interim measures are necessary where the actions of a party “‘are
capable of causing or threatening irreparable prejudice to the rights
invoked’’*® and will be deemed urgent where ‘‘action prejudicial to the
rights of either party is likely to be taken before such final decision is
given,’’?/

In order to prove irreparable harm, a party must show that the harm
threatened cannot be compensated by an order for damages. However, in
the course of making this determination, the tribunal must be careful to

5 Td. at { 43.

76 Aegean Sea Continental Shelf Case (Greece v. Turkey), Interim Measures of
Protection, Order of Sept. 11, 1976, Separate Opinion of President Jimanez de
Aréchaga, 1976 LC J. 3, at 11 (The Court denied an indication of interim measures
sought by Greece prohibiting both Greece and Turkey, absent mutual consent and
pending final judgment of the Court, from all exploration activity or scientific
research with respect to the continental shelf areas in dispute).

27 Case Concerning Passage through the Great Belt (Finland v. Denmark),
Provisional Measures, Order of July 29, 2001, 1991 I.C.J. 12, at 17 (The Court denied
an indication of interim measures sought by Finland requiring Denmark to refrain
from continuing or otherwise proceeding with construction works on a bridge
spanning the strait of Great Belt which would otherwise impede the passage of ships
to and from Finnish ports and shipyards). See also Tokio Tokelos v. Ukraine, ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/18, Order No. 3, {8 (Jan. 18, 2005), where the tribunal held that
there must be a “threat of irreparable harm”’ before provisional measures can be
ordered.

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 6/19/2019 12:35 AM via UNIVERSITEIT LEIDEN

AN: 308329 ; Rovine, Arthur W., Fordham University.; Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation
: The Fordham Papers 2008

Account: s2985883.main.ehost
ALL rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Copyright @ 2009. Brill | Nijhoff.

56 Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation

avoid pre-judging the merits of the dispute.2® As Professor Lew has
cautioned,

[I]n dealing with a request for an interim measure, an arbitral tribunal
must refrain from prejudging the merits of the case. By way of
illustration, an arbitral tribunal will generally refuse to grant such a
measure, where the request essentially covers what is asked to be
resolved in the substantial arbitration.”9

In many cases, there is a very fine line between granting relief to ensure that
a party is not irreparably prejudiced by events during the course of an
arbitral proceeding and pre-judging the outcome of the dispute. This
element of the provisional measures test is accordingly the most delicate
and challenging for an arbitrator to consider when faced with an interim
measures application, regardless of whether the party likely to be affected is
a state or a private actor.

CONCLUSION: A DISTINCTION WITHOUT A DIFFERENCE?

The last issue I wish to address concerns the differences, if any, of ordering
provisional measures against a State entity as opposed to a private entity.
The commonly held view is that there is no justification for tailoring the
arbitration process, including matters of provisional relief, on the basis of a
State’s particular status:

[I]n the field of arbitration of state contracts, the trend has increasingly
been for the state-party to be treated no differently than its private co-
contractor. Indeed, as states become more frequently involved in
commercial activities, special regimes for states and state-owned parties
often appear incompatible with the requirements of international
trade, such as the need to ensure the respect of agreements freely
entered into by the parties.*?

28 See Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Procedural
Order No. 2, § 21 (Oct. 28, 1999).

*9 Julian D.M. Lew, ‘‘Commentary on Interim and Conservatory Measures in
ICC Arbitration Cases’’ (2000) ICC Bull. 11, 23, cated in Redfern & Hunter, supra
note 6, at {{ 7-30.

°° E. Gaillard & J. Edelstein, “Recent Developments In State Immunity From
Execution In France: Creighton v. Qatar,’ 15 Mealy’s Intl Arb. Rep. 49 (2000).

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 6/19/2019 12:35 AM via UNIVERSITEIT LEIDEN

AN: 308329 ; Rovine, Arthur W., Fordham University.; Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation
: The Fordham Papers 2008

Account: s2985883.main.ehost
ALL rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Copyright @ 2009. Brill | Nijhoff.

Interim Measures 57

This, of course, is a natural consequence of the principle of party
equality, a fundamental condition of due process. The only difference lies
with a State’s expectations regarding the arbitral process:

The expectations of States differ very considerably from those of private
parties who resort to commercial arbitration. Here it may be as well to
remember that, unlike the situation of the private party who chooses
flexibility of the arbitral process as an escape from the strict require-
ments of litigation, arbitration in any form is for a State a loss of liberty,
an acceptance of constraints from which it is otherwise free.*!

Nevertheless, as Oscar Schachter has observed, where the request for
interim measures involves the operation of a natural resources concession,
“there may be reasons of a material and social character that make it
‘impossible’ or ‘impracticable’ for the offending State to restore the
situation to its prior state.’’* This was essentially the concern underpinning
negotiation of Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. According to Christoph
Schreuer, China, in particular, expressed concern over the ability of a State
to comply with a provisional measure for reasons of national policy.*
Additionally, the ability of a State party to “impose its will’ on an
independent branch of government, regardless of public international law
principles of state responsibility, is, as the tribunal in Plama intimated, in
certain circumstances questionable.*#

It may therefore be that although the binding nature of an interim
measure recommended by an ICSID tribunal is no longer seriously in
question, the sovereign character of a State party to an arbitration may, in
practical terms, influence the manner in which a tribunal disposes of an
application for interim measures. I end with this provisional view.

31H. Fox, ‘States and the Undertaking to Arbitrate,”’ 37 Intl Comp. L.Q. 1, at 4
(1988).

32 Oscar Schachter, International Law in Theory and in Practice, 178 Collected
Courses (Academy of International Law) 188, at 190 (1982).

°3 Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary 758 (2001).

+4 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/
24, Order, {40 (Sept. 6, 2005).

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 6/19/2019 12:35 AM via UNIVERSITEIT LEIDEN

AN: 308329 ; Rovine, Arthur W., Fordham University.; Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation
: The Fordham Papers 2008

Account: s2985883.main.ehost
Copyright @ 2009. Brill | Nijhoff.
ALL rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 6/19/2019 12:35 AM via UNIVERSITEIT LEIDEN

AN: 308329 ; Rovine, Arthur W., Fordham University.; Contemporary Issues in International Arbitration and Mediation
: The Fordham Papers 2008

Account: s2985883.main.ehost
