Chapter 12

Provisional Measures in ICSID Arbitration: The
Irreparable Harm Requirement

Claudia Frutos-Peterson and Diora Ziyaeva*
I. INTRODUCTION

ICSID tribunals have consistently decided! that provisional measures
under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention could only be granted to protect

* Claudia Frutos-Peterson is a Partner and Diora Ziyaeva is an Associate in the
International Arbitration Group of Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP. The views
expressed in this article are exclusively those of the authors and shall not be attributed to
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP or its clients. The authors gratefully
acknowledge the editorial assistance of Andrey Kuznetsov and Francisco Sanchez.

1 See, e.g., Churchill Mining Ple and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID
Case No. ARB/12/14 and 12/40, Procedural Order No. 9 Provisional Measures, 9 100-
103 (July 8, 2014) (“Churchill Procedural Order No. 9”); Lao Holdings N.V. v. The Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/6, Ruling on Motion to Amend the
Provisional Measure Order, J {| 9, 75 (May 30, 2014) (“Lao Holdings’); Churchill Mining Plc
and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/14 and 12/40,
Procedural Order No. 3 Provisional Measures, § 42 (March 4, 2013) (“Churchill Procedural
Order No. 3”); Tethyan Copper Company Pty Ltd v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Decision on
Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, §{ 118-119 (December 13, 2012)
(“Tethyan”’),; Burimi SRL and Eagle Games SH.A v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No.
ARB/11/18, Procedural Order No. 2, {34-35 (May 3, 2012) (“Burim?’); Abaclat and
others v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5, Procedural Order No. 11, ¥ 11
(June 27, 2012) (“Abaclat, Procedural Order No. 11”); Iona Micula and others v. Romania,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20, Decision on Claimants’ Application for Provisional
Measures, § 12 (March 2, 2011) (“Iona Micula”); Cemex Caracas Investments B.V. and Cemex
Caracas II Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/15,
Decision on the Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures, {J 44-56 (March 3, 2010)
(“Cemex”); Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kapliun v. Plurinational
State of Bolivia (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/02), Decision on Provisional Measures, J 113
(February 26, 2010) (“Quiborax”); Millicom International Operations B.V. and Sentel GSM SA
v. The Republic of Senegal, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/20, Decision on the Application for
Provisional Measures, J 39 (August 24, 2009) (“Millicom”); Caratube International Oil
Company LLP v. The Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/12, Decision
Regarding Claimant’s Application for Provisional Measures, § 136 (July 31, 2009)
(“Caratube”); Burlington Resources Inc. v. The Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/5, Procedural Order No. 1, J 51, 82 (June 29, 2009) (“Burlington”), Perenco
Ecuador Ltd. v. Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), ICSID Case
No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Provisional Measures, { 43 (May 8, 2009) (“Perenco”);
Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Decision on
Provisional Measures, § 33 (April 6, 2007) (“Phoenix Action’); Occidental Petroleum
Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic of Ecuador,

209
210 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

the rights of either party in case of urgency and necessity.* Arbitral
tribunals generally agree that inquiry into the “necessity” of a provisional
measure involves consideration of the harm it seeks to avoid. ICSID
tribunals by and large have followed the International Court of Justice
(“ICJ”) “irreparable harm” or “irreparable prejudice” criterion for
determining when a provisional measure is necessary.*? That standard, to
the extent that the case law has clarified its contours, includes harm that
cannot be fully remedied, reversed or rectified by an award of monetary
damages.4 However, several ICSID tribunals have applied a purportedly

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Provisional Measures, J] 61 (August 17, 2007)
(“Occidental”), Satpem S.p.A. v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/07, Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures, §
182 (March 21, 2007) (“Saipem”); Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID
Case No. ARB/03/24, Order, {38 (September 6, 2005) (“Plama’).

2 As part of the requirements to grant provisional measures, some tribunals will also
determine whether they have prima facie jurisdiction over the subject matter of the request.
See, e.g., Tethyan, J 122 (finding prima facie jurisdiction under Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention and the applicable BIT). Other tribunals have set forth two additional criteria:
a) prima facie establishment of the merits of the case, and b) the extent to which interim
measures would inconvenience the other party. Tribunals seem to have taken into
consideration the last two requirements when acting under the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules. See, e.g., Sergei Paushok et al v. Mongolia, UNCITRAL, Order on Interim Measures, §
55 (September 2, 2008) (“Paushok’) (a tribunal “need not go beyond whether a reasonable
case has been made which, if the facts alleged are proven, might possibly lead the Tribunal
to the conclusion that an award could be made in favor of Claimants.’). But for an ICSID
case, see Tethyan, 117 (“The question of whether the right to be preserved exists goes to
the merits of the case which will not be decided at this preliminary stage of the
proceedings. It therefore suffices that the party requesting the provisional measure
establishes a prima facie case that it owns a legally protected interest.”).

3 See infra at 10-12.

4 Applications for security for costs are generally not governed by the standard criteria
for interim measures, such as urgency or risk of irreparable harm. See, e.g., Gary B. Born,
INTERNATIONAL COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION, VOL. Il: INTERNATIONAL ARBITRAL
PROCEDURES, p. 2473 (2d ed. 2014) (“Born”) (finding that “applications for security for
legal costs typically do not require showings of an urgent risk of irreparable harm.”);
Jeffrey Waincymer, PROCEDURE AND EVIDENCE IN INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION, p. 647
(2012) (“Waincymer”) (contending that “the standard criteria for considering interim
measure applications do not normally apply to security for costs. A typical interim
measure application such as preserving evidence or assets or enjoining a party against
taking a proposed course of action looks for urgency, serious or irreparable harm and a
tenable case on the merits. Where security for costs applications are concerned, urgency
and injunctive relief is not relevant. The irreparable harm is simply the allegation that a
losing claimant will not be able to pay a costs award. As to consideration on the merits,
that can remain relevant and is effectively looked at in reverse. The less likely the merit
in the claims, the more there might be concern to protect a potential cost award in favour
of the responding party.”).
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 211

lower standard of harm leading some commentators to herald the decline
of ICSID tribunals’ use of the irreparable harm standard.°®

Yet, as the following analysis will show, the 2010 provisional
measures decision in Cemex and the post-Cemex provisional measures
decisions’ seek to dispel the doubts over the applicability of the ICJ
necessity standard and its notion of irreparable harm in ICSID arbitration.
Following a survey of the ICJ and ICSID case law on provisional measures,
the Cemex tribunal saw “no reason not to retain the generally accepted
standard of ‘irreparable harm’ as criterion for the ‘necessity’ required by
Article 47 of the ICSID Convention.”®

After a brief review of the close relationship between Article 47 of the
ICSID Convention and Article 41 of the ICJ Statute, Part II will describe the
irreparable harm standard developed by the IC] as applied in ICSID
arbitration cases. Part III will address the string of decisions purporting to
apply a more relaxed criterion of necessity to applications for provisional
measures. Part IV will address the Cemex decision and those in its wake to
demonstrate that ICSID case law continues to identify irreparable harm as
the criterion for necessity under the ICSID Convention, concluding that
predictions of adoption of a less demanding standard are overstated.

5 See Burlington, § 82; Perenco, § 43; City Oriente Limited v. The Republic of Ecuador and
Empresa Estatal de Petrdleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21,
Decision on Provisional Measures, J] 55-59 (November 19, 2007) (“City Oriente”);
Quiborax, § 156.

6 See, e.g, Dan Sarooshi, Provisional Measures and Investment Treaty Arbitration, in 29
ARB. INT'L, ISSUE 3, 361, 365-66, 378 (2013) (“Sarooshi’) (contending that “it is more
appropriate for ICSID Tribunals to adopt the lower threshold test of a ‘significant harm
or threat’ to the parties rights when deciding whether provisional measures are
‘necessary’ rather than using the ICJ’s higher threshold of ‘irreparable prejudice”); Born,
pp. 2488-2491 (finding it “very doubtful” that ICJ’s irreparable harm or prejudice
standard will find application in the setting of investment treaty arbitration); Caline
Mouawad, Elizabeth Silbert, A Guide to Interim Measures in Investor-State Arbitration, in 29
ARB. INT'L, ISSUE 3, 392 (2013) (“Mouawad and Silbert”) (finding that the concepts of
“substantial harm” and “irreparable harm” are flexible under international law and do
not necessarily require that the injury complained to be not remediable by an award of
damages). See also Gabrielle Kauffman-Kohler, Interim Relief in International Investment
Agreements, in ARBITRATION UNDER INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS: AN
ANALYSIS OF THE KEY PROCEDURAL, JURISDICTIONAL AND SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES, 507 (Katia
Yannaca-Small (ed.), Oxford University Press 2010), pp. 543-44 (“Kauffman-Kohler”)
(stressing that the finding of “irreparable harm” tends to be closely linked to the non-
existence of monetary relief and wondering whether a less demanding standard of
necessity in UNCITRAL commercial and investor-state arbitration could influence the
ICSID arbitration).

7 Lao Holdings, {| 16, 37-42; Tethyan, { 118; Burimi, | 34-35; Churchill Procedural Order
No. 3, § 42; Abaclat, Procedural Order No. 11, § 11; Iona Micula, § 12.

8 Cemex, J] 44-56.
212 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

II. ICJ STANDARD OF IRREPARABLE HARM AND ITS
APPLICATION BY ICSID TRIBUNALS

A. The Close Relationship between Article 47 of the ICSID Convention
and Article 41 of the ICJ Statute

Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Article 41 of the ICJ Statute
are actually close. In a semantic sense, the wording of both provisions is
identical and, ceteris paribus, it would be reasonable to argue that they
should be interpreted similarly. Moreover, the drafting history of Article
47 of the ICSID Convention supports the contention of this very close
relationship.

Article 41(1) of the ICJ Statute reads as follows: “The Court shall
have the power to indicate, if it considers that circumstances so require, any
provisional measures which ought to be taken to preserve the respective rights of
either party.”°

The formulation of the provisional measures provision used in the
ICJ Statute goes as far back as the Permanent Court of International Justice
(“PCI”) Statute. The language of both statutes vis-a-vis the articles on
provisional measures is the same.!° Because the substantive content of
Article 41(1) of the ICJ Statute remained identical to its predecessor, the
subsequent jurisprudence of the ICJ has applied the same treatment to the
matter of provisional measures as the PCIJ." It is in applying Article 41
that the ICJ foreshadowed the test to grant provisional measures, which
has shaped customary international law standards of urgency and
necessity.

Under the ICSID Convention the power of ICSID arbitral tribunals to
recommend provisional measures derives from Article 47. Article 47
states:

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it
considers that the circumstances so require, recommend any provisional

® United Nations, Statute of the International Court of Justice, 1 UNTS XVI, Chapter III
Article 41 (October 24, 1945) (emphasis added).

10 Article 41 of the PCIJ Statue provided: “[t]he Court shall have the power to indicate, if
it considers that circumstances so require, any provisional measures which ought to be
taken to reserve the respective rights of either party.” Statute of the Permanent Court of
International Justice, 1 UNTS XVI, Chapter III Article 41 (December 16, 1920).

" During the jurisprudence of the PCIJ, there were six requests for provisional
measures (out of a total of 66 cases decided between 1920 and 1942). Two of the requests
were granted. From 1947 to 2009, the ICJ received 40 such requests: 20 were rejected, 16
were granted, one was withdrawn by the applicant, two were removed from the list and
one lapsed. See Kempen, Bernhard and He, Zan, The Practice of the International Court of
Justice on Provisional Measures: The Recent Development, in ZEITSCHRIFT FUR
AUSLANDISCHES OFFENTLICHES RECHT UND VOLKERRECHT VOL. 69 (2009), p. 919, n. 1
(“Kempen and He”).
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 213

measures which should be taken to preserve the respective rights of either

party.'2

The operative portions of Article 47 of the ICSID Convention, Article
41 of the ICJ Statute and Article 41 of the PCIJ Statute are identical in
formulation. This identical wording of the provisions tends to suggest that
there should be a bound commonality in the interpretation of Article 41 of
the ICJ Statute and Article 47 of the ICSID Convention.

Further, the travaux préparatoires of the ICSID Convention
demonstrate that Article 47 was directly modeled on and inspired by
Article 41 of the ICJ Statute. The drafting history of the ICSID
Convention indicates that the intention of the drafters was to follow
customary international law. In the relevant section of the 1964
Chairman’s Report on issues raised and suggestions made with respect to
the preliminary draft of the ICSID Convention, it states that:

[t]he provision in the Working Paper defines the measures which
a tribunal may prescribe as those which are “necessary for the
protection of the rights of the parties.” Several delegations
thought the criterion might be spelled out in more detail (by
specifying such matters as avoidance of frustration of an eventual
award, irreparable damage and urgent necessity and clarifying
the term “rights of the parties”) and an indication might be given
in general terms of what the provisional measures would be ...
the latitude given to arbitral tribunals by the Working Paper is in
accordance with generally accepted custom....\4

Although the travaux preparatoires to the ICSID Convention do not
provide any definitive standard or the precise definition of the criterion,'®

2 JCSID Convention, Article 47 (emphasis added). See also the text of Rule 39 of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, which contains detailed provisions governing the standard and
procedure for issuing provisional measures.

13 Lawrence Collins, ESSAYS IN INTERNATIONAL LITIGATION AND THE CONFLICT OF LAWS,
74 (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994); see also Loretta Malintoppi, Provisional Measures in
Recent ICSID Proceedings: What Parties Request and What Tribunals Order, 11, in
INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT LAW FOR THE 21ST CENTURY: ESSAYS IN HONOUR OF
CRISTOPH SCHREUER (C. Binder, et al eds., 2009).

4 History of the ICSID Convention, Regional Consultative Meetings of Legal Experts on
Settlement of Investment Disputes, Chairman’s Report on Issues Raised and Suggestions
Made with Respect to the Preliminary Draft of a Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes Between States and National of Other States (July 9, 1964), Vol. II-1,
p. 573 (emphasis added).

5 See, e.g., History of the ICSID Convention, 1968, Vol. II-1, pp. 337, 515, 573. See also,
Christoph Schreuer et al., THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY, Second Edition
(Cambridge University Press 2009), pp. 775-777 (“C. Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A
COMMENTARY”) (on the issue of irreparable harm, Professor Schreuer analyzes the matter,
but does not posit a standard; he mainly describes what most tribunals have done).
214 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

the drafters understood that the interim relief would be an extraordinary
remedy in light of customary international law. It was pointed out that
such measures would only be used in situations of absolute necessity and
that tribunals would exercise self-restraint in their application. '°
According to the drafters of the ICSID Convention:

...[t{]here would be very few, if any, cases of irreparable damage,
because disputes would concern investments and investments could
always be valued in terms of money.”

[...] the experience indicated that arbitral tribunals were extremely
loath to order provisional or interim measures and one should have some
confidence in the self-restraint which tribunals would impose upon
themselves,'®

[...] provisional measures ought not be prescribed unless absolutely
necessary in the circumstances, and if pecuniary compensation would be
adequate in lieu of some preliminary measure, then no preliminary
measure ought to be prescribed. On that basis, such measures
ought to be included in the enforcement provision. That might
also have the effect of discouraging tribunals from prescribing
preliminary measures save in the most exceptional cases.

The drafting history of Article 47 of the ICSID Convention suggests a
close link to the standards for issuing provisional measures put forward
by Article 41 of the ICJ Statute. Based on the above, it would be reasonable
to interpret Article 47 of the ICSID Convention in accordance with the IC]
jurisprudence.”

B. Urgency and Necessity under the IC] Jurisprudence

The ICJ jurisprudence considers requests for provisional measures in
terms of their urgency and necessity to avoid irreparable prejudice
(harm), 7! although the ICJ has not always rigorously distinguished

16 C. Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY, p. 775.

7 History of the ICSID Convention, Comment voiced by Mr. Tsai (China), 1968, Vol. II-
1, p. 516 (emphasis added).

18 History of the ICSID Convention, Comment voiced by Mr. Broches (Chairman), 1968,
Vol. II-1, p. 516 (emphasis added).

19 History of the ICSID Convention, Comment articulated by Mr. O’Donovan
(Australia), 1968, Vol. II-1, p. 523 (emphasis added).

20 Much is drawn from the ICJ’s experience over the past seventy years, but
considerable emphasis must also be attributed to the PCIJ (especially the 1932 Status of
Eastern Greenland cases between Denmark and Norway).

*1 For instance, the Fisheries Jurisdiction (Federal Republic of Germany v. Iceland), Interim
Protection, Order of August 17, 1972, LC J. Reports 1972, 9 22 reads as follows:
“[w]hereas the right of the Court to indicate provisional measures as provided for in
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 215

between the two criteria and has often spoken of “urgent necessity” as the
standard to be applied.27 The IC] appears to be inclined to interpret the
“irreparability” as “impossibility of full execution of the final judgment.”

The notion of irreparable harm or prejudice was most likely first
defined by the PCIJ in the Sino Belgian Treaty Case as one that cannot be
compensated by way of damages or restitution in some other material
form.*4 In the Aegean Sea Continental Shelf Case, the ICJ considered its
power under Article 41 of the ICJ Statute in terms of the necessity
requirement, i.e., “whether provisional measures are necessary to preserve
the rights of either party and whether the acts complained of are capable of

Article 41 of the Statute has as its object to preserve the respective rights of the Parties
pending the decision of the Court, and presupposes that irreparable prejudice should be
not caused to rights which are the subject of dispute in judicial proceedings, and that the
Court’s judgment should not be anticipated by reason of any initiative regarding the
measures which are at issues.” See also Construction of a Road in Costa Rica along the San
Juan River (Nicaragua v. Costa Rica), Order of December 13, 2013, I.C.J. Reports 2013, 4 25
where the ICJ found that “[t]he power of the Court to indicate provisional measures will
be exercised only if there is urgency, in the sense that there is a real and imminent risk
that irreparable prejudice will be caused to the rights in dispute before the Court has
given its final decision.” Having found that Nicaragua had not established that the
ongoing construction works led to a substantial increase in the sediment load in the
river, no real and imminent risk of irreparable prejudice to the rights invoked was found
to be substantiated, and hence rejected the request for provisional measures.

2 Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentine v. Uruguay), Provisional Measures, Order of
January 23, 2007, I.C.J. Reports 2007, 9 31-32 (“Pulp Mills’). See also Passage through the
Great Belt (Finland v. Denmark), Provisional Measures, Order of July 29, 1991, I.CJ.
Reports 1991, J 23 (“Passage through the Great Belt’); Certain Criminal Proceedings in France
(Republic of the Congo v. France), Order of June 17, 2003, L.C.J. Reports 2003, | 22 (“Certain
Criminal Proceedings in France’).

23 Kempen and He, p. 922, n. 10 citing to Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (United Kingdom v.
Iran), Order of July 5, 1951, IC J. Reports 1951, p. 93. See also Application of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v.
Russian Federation), Provisional Measures, Order of October 15, 2008, I.C.J. Reports 2008,
{| 118; Request for Interpretation of the Judgment of 31 March 2004 in the Case concerning
Avena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States of America), Provisional
Measures, Order of July 26, 2008, I.C.J. Reports 2008, {| 65; Application of the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, Provisional Measures, Order of
April 8, 1993, LC.J. Reports 1993, { 34; Land and Maritime Boundary Case between Cameroon
and Nigeria, Provisional Measures, Order of March 15, 1996, ILC. J. Reports 1996, 4 35
(“Land and Maritime Boundary Case’).

24 Denunciation of the Treaty of November 2nd, 1865, between China and Belgium (Belgium v.
China), 1929 P.C.LJ. (ser. A) No. 18 (Order of May 25), {9-10 (issuing interim measures
to protect Belgian mission, ships, nationals and property in China given that “the object
of the measures of interim protections contemplated by the Statute of the Court is to
preserve the respective rights of the Parties, pending the decision by the court” and that
the infraction in question “could not be made good simply by the payment of an
indemnity or by compensation or restitution in some other material form.”).
216 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

causing or of threatening irreparable prejudice to the rights invoked.”*> In
Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v. France), the ICJ held that the power of the
Court to indicate interim measures under Article 41 of the Statute aimed at
preserving the rights of the parties presupposes “that irreparable prejudice
should not be caused to rights which are the subject of the dispute.”°

More recently, in the Pulp Mills Case, the ICJ further reiterated that
pursuant to Article 41 of the ICJ Statute and ICJ jurisprudence, the Court
has the power to issue interim measures “provided such measures are
necessary to prevent irreparable prejudice to the rights that are in
dispute.”?” Similarly, in Cambodia v. Thailand, the ICJ reasoned that “the
Court, pursuant to Article 41 of its Statute, has the power to indicate
provisional measures when irreparable prejudice could be caused to rights
which are the subject of the judicial proceedings... [the] power of the
Court to indicate provisional measures will be exercised only if there is
urgency, in the sense that there is a real and imminent risk that irreparable
prejudice may be caused to the rights in dispute before the Court has given
its final decision.” 2°

In the jurisprudence of the ICJ, it appears that while the damages to
property might be reparable, the threat to life or health is irreparable,
indicating that the purpose is to prevent irreparable prejudice to human
life rather than the subject-matter of the main claim. Although the ICJ
occasionally asserted that non-aggravation could be one of the
circumstances that the Court should take into consideration, nonetheless,

25 Aegean Sea Continental Shelf Case (Greece v. Turkey), Interim Measures of Protection,
Order of September 11, 1976, Separate Opinion of President Jiménez de Aréchaga, I.C.J.
Reports 1976, p. 16 (“Aegean Sea, Separate Opinion of President Jiménez de Aréchaga’”);
Aegean Sea Continental Shelf Case (Greece v. Turkey), Interim Measures of Protection, Order
of September 11, 1976, I.C.J. Reports 1976, 32-33 (applying Article 41 and holding that
there is no risk of “irreparable prejudice” to the rights of Greece since the alleged breach
by Turkey of Greece’s right to acquire information concerning the natural resources on
the continental shelf “might be capable of reparation by appropriate means.”). In
addition, in United States Diplomatic and Consular Staff in Teheran, applying Article 41 of
the ICJ with the aim of avoiding “irreparable prejudice” to the parties’ rights stated that
“the continuation of the situation the subject of the presented request exposes the human
beings concerned to privation, hardship, anguish and even danger to life and health and
thus a serious possibility of irreparable harm.” Case Concerning United States Diplomatic
and Consular Staff in Teheran, Provisional Measures, Order of December 15, 1979, I.C.J.
Reports 1979, |] 36, 42.

26 Nuclear Tests (Australia v. France), Interim Protection, Order of June 22, 1973, LC J.
Reports 1973, § 20; see also LaGrand (Germany v. United States of America), Provisional
Measures, Order of March 3 1999, C.J. Reports 1999, ¢ 23 (the court held that it “will not
order interim measures in the absence of ‘irreparable prejudice...to the rights which are
subject of the dispute...’””).

27 Pulp Mills, 1] 60-62.

8 Request for Interpretation of the Judgment of 15 June 1962 in the Case concerning the Temple
of Preah Vihear (Cambodia v. Thailand) (Cambodia v. Thailand), Provisional Measures,
Order of July 18, 2011, LC.J. Reports 2011, 4] 46-47.
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 217

the IC) affirmatively observed that “non-aggravation of the dispute”
cannot be regarded as an independent basis of the indication of
provisional measures.”°

C. Urgency and Necessity under ICSID Jurisprudence Constante

It is widely accepted that two of the main requirements for ICSID
tribunals to grant provisional measures are: 1) the urgency of the need for
such measures; and 2) the necessity of measures to avoid irreparable
harm.*° ICSID tribunals have looked into the jurisprudence of the ICJ in
connection with the interpretation of Article 41 of the ICJ Statute to
determine the standards of urgency and necessity when issuing interim
relief. In Pey Casado v. Chile, for instance, the tribunal observed that Article
47 of the ICSID Convention is directly inspired by Article 41 of the ICJ
Statute. In that case, the tribunal stated that Article 47 “is not an
innovation in the history of international jurisdiction; it is directly inspired
by Article 41 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice, hence the
particular importance that can be accorded to the judgments given in the
past by that Court” in that matter.°!

ICSID tribunals agree that “[t]he imposition of provisional measures is
an extraordinary remedy that should not be granted lightly...” A
common formulation is that “[p]rovisional measures are not meant to
protect against any potential or hypothetical harm susceptible to result from
uncertain actions.”*> Rather, they are meant to protect the requesting party
from imminent harm.*+ The burden of showing that provisional measures

29 According to the Court, the “non-aggravation of the dispute” is not regarded as an
independent basis of the indication of provisional measures. Only the possible
aggravation of the rights of the parties that have been found under the imminent risk or
irreparable prejudice can be considered. See, e.g. Land and Maritime Boundary Case, § 42
(the Court concluded that “the events that have given rise to the request, and more
especially the killing of persons, have caused irreparable damage to the rights that the
Parties may have over the Peninsula; whereas persons in the disputed area and, as a
consequence, the rights of the Parties within that area are exposed to serious risk of
further irreparable damage...”). See also Declaration of Judge Oda in the Land and Maritime
Boundary Case (“[the] loss of life in the disputed area, distressing as it undoubtedly is,
does not constitute the real subject matter of the present case”). See, e.g., Kempen and
He, p. 921.

30 See supra pp. 1-2 and note 2.

31 Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No.
ARB/98/2, Decision on Provisional Measures, { 2 (September 25, 2001) (“Pey Casado”).
See also C. Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY, p. 759.

32 See Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Procedural Order
No. 2, { 10 (October 28, 1999) (“Maffezini’”’); Plama, J 38; Phoenix Action, § 33; Occidental, J
87; Burimi, J 34. See also Paushok, J 39 for a case under the UNCITRAL Rules.

33 Occidental, § 89; Burimt, J 34-35.

34 Occidental, § 87.
218 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

are urgent and necessary to avoid irreparable harm falls on the requesting
party; where evidence is lacking, provisional measures must be denied.*°

While the content of the urgency requirement has not produced
serious controversy in investment treaty arbitration,°*° the contours of the
necessity requirement and, more specifically, whether irreparable harm is
a requirement for an ICSID tribunal to grant provisional measures have
occasioned some discussion. °” The focal point of the analysis is
determining whether irreparable harm or prejudice will occur if the
tribunal denies the prayer for interim measures.

In Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, the tribunal, relying on the Aegean Sea
Continental Shelf Case, observed that a provisional measure is necessary
where “the actions of a party are capable of causing or of threatening
irreparable prejudice to the rights invoked.”**

The Phoenix v. the Czech Republic tribunal adopted a similar reasoning
from the ICJ jurisprudence and, relying also on the Aegean Sea Continental
Shelf Case, held that “international jurisprudence on provisional measures
indicates that a provisional measure is necessary where the actions of a
party ‘are capable of causing or of threatening irreparable prejudice to the
rights invoked.’”°°

The Occidental v. Ecuador tribunal based its holding on the Aegean Sea
Continental Shelf Case and went a step further to conclude that the ICJ
jurisprudence regarding when interim measures are necessary is “well
established,” namely “a provisional measure is necessary where the
actions of a party are ‘capable of causing or of threatening irreparable
prejudice to the rights invoked.’” According to the tribunal, under Article
47 of the ICSID Convention, provisional measures are those measures that
are “necessary to preserve a party’s rights where the need is urgent in
order to avoid irreparable harm.”*° The tribunal found there was no
irreparable harm since the claimant’s harm, ie., the potential loss of the

35 See Tanzania Electric Supply Company v. Independent Power Tanzania Limited, ICSID Case
No. ARB/98/8, Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures
(December 20, 1999) (“Tanzania”).

36 As far as the urgency requirement is concerned, commentators and tribunals agree
that “provisional measures are only appropriate if it is impossible to wait for a specific
issue to be settled at the merits stage.” See City Oriente, § 67. See also Quiborax, 4 150;
Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Procedural Order
No. 1, § 76 (March 31, 2006) (“Biwater”).

37 Sarooshi, pp. 365-66; Born, pp. 2488-2491.

38 Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Order No. 3, { 8 January 18,
2005) (“Tokios Tokelés, Order No. 3”), citing the Aegean Sea, Separate Opinion of President
Jiménez de Aréchaga, p. 16.

39 Phoenix Action, { 33.

0 Occidental, § 59.
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 219

contractual concession right to operate an oil field, if any, could be
compensated by a monetary award.*!

Thus, ICSID tribunals have widely accepted the applicability of the
ICJ jurisprudence construing Article 41 of the ICJ Statute in issuing interim
measures under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and accepting the
irreparable harm or prejudice standard for necessity of provisional
measures.42 However, a few ICSID cases seem to have departed from the
ICJ jurisprudence of the irreparable harm standard when determining
whether preliminary measures are necessary.

Il. A DIFFERENT STANDARD OF “NECESSITY”?

Several ICSID tribunals seem to have followed a more “relaxed”
standard of necessity for issuing provisional measures, derived not from
the ICJ Statute and the jurisprudence construing it, but rather from the
2006 UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration (the
“2006 UNCITRAL Model Law”).4 The 2006 UNICTRAL Model Law
provision on interim measures requires a showing that “harm not
adequately reparable by an award of damages is likely to result if the
measure is not ordered.”“4

The travaux preparatoires of the 2006 UNCITRAL Model Law
articulate the reasons involving the use of the balance of interests language
in the context of conditions for granting interim measures:

[s]ubparagraph (a) follows the proposal made by the Working
Group fo replace the words “irreparable harm” with the words “harm
not adequately reparable by an award of damages” ... irreparable harm
might present too high a threshold and would more clearly establish

41 Occidental, § 92.

#® See, e.g., Lao Holdings, J 9; Occidental, | 59; Pey Casado, | 2.

43 The Model Law serves as the basis for harmonizing national arbitration legislations
addressing every stage of the arbitral process. The Model Law “reflects a worldwide
consensus on the principles and important issues of international arbitration practice.”
See Explanatory Note to the 1985 UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial
Arbitration, with Amendments as Adopted in 2006, {| 2; see also Kaufman-Kohler, p. 510.
The 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules empowered the tribunals to grant interim relief,
but were silent on the requirements for issuing provisional measures. Compare Article
26 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (featuring no specification of the standard
for issuing interim measures, their types or tribunal powers with respect to such
measures), and Article 17A of the 2006 UNCITRAL Model Law (providing the standard
and conditions for issuing interim measures, a non-exhaustive list of the types of
measures, and expounding the tribunal’s powers with respect to interim measures).

44 Chapter IV, Article 17(A), 2006 UNCITRAL Model Law; Explanatory Note to the 1985
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration, with Amendments as
Adopted in 2006, 9] 27-30; Kaufman-Kohler, p. 510.
220 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

the discretion of the arbitral tribunal in deciding upon the
issuance of an interim measure ...*°

The drafters of the 2006 UNCITRAL Model Law intended to replace
the “irreparable harm” standard with a lower threshold standard
suggesting an alternative trend in interim relief in favor of applying the
balance of interests standard instead.*¢

It seems that the cases in which ICSID tribunals have relied on the
standard applied under the 2006 UNCITRAL Model Law involved special
circumstances seeking to preserve the claimant’s investment which could
not be adequately remedied by an award of damages.‘”

The Burlington v. Ecuador provisional measures decision concerned
the seizure by the Ecuadorian authorities of claimant’s oil fields in the
Amazon Region and their production in order to collect the allegedly
unpaid sums under a new hydrocarbon law as well as the termination of
the production sharing contracts for the oil fields.4* The Burlington
tribunal concluded that such measures endangered the claimant’s rights to
non-aggravation of the dispute, continued specific performance of the two
contracts and preservation of the effectiveness of the award.*? The
Burlington tribunal analyzed the necessity criterion for provisional
measures, holding that, “[i]n the circumstances of the present case, this
Tribunal finds it appropriate to follow those cases that adopt the standard
of ‘harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages’ to use the
words of the UNCITRAL Model Law.”® The tribunal elaborated on such
“circumstances” and concluded that the damage is not adequately
compensable by money for the following reasons:

[T]his case is not one of only more damages caused by the passage
of time. It is a case of avoidance of a different damage. The risk here
is the destruction of an ongoing investment and of its revenue-producing
potential which benefits both the investor and the State. Indeed, if the
investor must continue to finance operation expenses while making
losses, from a business point of view it is likely that it will reduce

4 U.N. Commission on Int’l Trade Law, Settlement of commercial disputes, Interim
measures of protection, Note by the Secretariat, { 16, U.N. Doc. A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.138
(August 8, 2005) (emphasis added). See also U.N. Commission on Int’ Trade Law, Report
of the Working Group on Arbitration on the work of its fortieth session (New York, 23-27
February 2004), § 89, U.N. Doc. A/CN.9/547 (April 16, 2004).

46 The new 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules mirror the language of Article 17A(1)(a)
of the 2006 UNCITRAL Model Law. Article 26(3)(a) provides that “[h]Jarm not
adequately reparable by an award of damages is likely to result if the measure is not
ordered.”

47 See, e.g., Burlington, Perenco, City Oriente, and Quiborax.

48 Burlington, JJ 11, 14.

49 Burlington, JJ 59-68.

5° Burlington, J 82.
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 221

its investment and maintenance costs to a minimum and thus its
output and the shared revenues. There is also an obvious economic
risk that it will cease operating altogether. While profit sharing
may be legitimate, expecting that a foreign investor will continue to
operate a loss making investment over years is unreasonable as a
matter of practice. Contrary to the Respondents’ assertion
pursuant to which the protection would be granted against the
investor’s own act of “walking away”, the Tribunal considers that
the project and its economic standing is at risk regardless of the
conduct of the investor.*

In light of the risk of “the destruction of an ongoing investment and
of its revenue-producing potential,” the Burlington tribunal ruled in favor
of the “significant” harm standard advocated for by the claimant, as
opposed to the “irreparable, i., not compensable by money” harm
standard advocated for by the respondent.** The tribunal accepted the
Paushok tribunal’s proposition that “irreparable harm” has a “flexible
meaning” in international law, and sided with the cases that adopted the
2006 UNCITRAL Model Law Article 17A(1) standard requiring a “balance
of interests” analysis, ie., assessment of the risk of harm posed by the
provisional measures or their absence to the rights of both parties, not just
the applicant’s.*

In Perenco v. Ecuador, the tribunal asserted that the ICSID Arbitration
Rules do not lay down a test of irreparable loss. In that case, the claimant
requested provisional measures after the respondent ordered the seizure of
Perenco’s oil production and shipment under the Participation Contract
until such time as the claimant pays its debt pursuant to the new
hydrocarbon law increasing “extraordinary gains” taxes.* The claimant
sought specific performance of the Participation Contract in its request for
relief.°° The Perenco tribunal relied on the Electricity Company of Sofia and
LaGrand cases for the proposition that a provisional measure is imposed
with the view of preventing the aggravation of or extension of the dispute.
The Perenco tribunal held that the necessity requirement of Article 47 of the
ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules are satisfied
when “one party may cause loss to the other which may not be capable of
being made good by an eventual award of damages.” The Perenco tribunal

51 Burlington, J 83 (emphasis added).

52 Burlington, J 75, 84-85.

3 Burlington, | § 80-85 (citing Paushok, 62, 68-69; City Oriente Ltd. v. Ecuador & Anor.,
ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Revocation of Provisional Measures and Other
Procedural Matters, § 72 (May 13, 2008) (“City Oriente Decision on Revocation”);
Occidental, J 99).

54 Perenco, {| 13-16.

55 Perenco, { 46.

56 Perenco, { 43.
222 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

ordered provisional measures, concluding that in their absence Perenco
faced “the imminent seizure of its assets in Ecuador (whether oil, plant,
equipment or bank balances)” and that its “business would be crippled, if
not destroyed.”°” The Perenco tribunal held that “the grant of provisional
measures in such circumstances is fully sanctioned by a long line of
authority, laid down by the Permanent Court of International Justice, the
International Court of Justice, ICSID Tribunals and at least one UNCITRAL
Tribunal.” 5 However, the Perenco tribunal went on to emphasize that
Article 47 of the ICSID Convention does not contain the irreparable harm
test to meet the necessity requirement. As the tribunal explained:

[Provisional measures] must be necessary, because that is what
“require” means, and measures will be not necessary where a
party can be adequately compensated by an award of damages if
it successfully vindicates its rights when the case is finally
decided. Thus, as the Respondents correctly submit, many of the
authorities express the test in terms of “irreparable loss.” Where
action by one party may cause loss to the other which may not be
capable of being made good by an eventual award of damages,
the test in the Article is likely to be met. But the Article does not
lay down a test of irreparable loss and the authorities do not
warrant so narrow a construction.”

The Perenco tribunal relied extensively on the City Oriente v. Ecuador
provisional measures decision. City Oriente presented a similar situation
in that the main relief that the claimant sought was performance of its oil
exploration and exploitation contracts with Petroecuador and that the
dispute concerned the “recoverability of enhanced payments required by
[Hydrocarbon] Law 42.”© The tribunal granted provisional measures
because Petroecuador had made repeated demands for payment under the
newly enacted hydrocarbon law, and Petroecuador and Ecuador had
commenced an administrative proceeding to terminate the contract. The
tribunal found that these actions aggravated the dispute and were contrary
to the maintenance of the sfatus quo and pacta sunt servanda, as the contract
required all disputes to be settled through arbitration. In addition, three
City Oriente executives faced criminal charges of embezzlement due to
City Oriente’s failure to pay the amounts due under the new hydrocarbon
law, as well as a separate complaint against City Oriente for non-payment
of the sums due under the law. The tribunal found that these actions were
aimed at coercing payment under the new hydrocarbon law and thereby

57 Perenco, {| 46, 53.

58 Perenco, { 54.

59 Perenco, ¥ 43.

60 Perenco, § 57; City Oriente, 4] 55-59.
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 223

aggravated the dispute, as the respondents sought to take justice into their
own hands.*!

Specifically, the City Oriente tribunal concluded that the respondents
must refrain from acts that undermine its performance obligations under
the contract to preserve the status quo and not aggravate the dispute. The
tribunal observed:

In the opinion of this Tribunal, the provisional measures
requested by Claimant are necessary to preserve Claimant's rights
and the claims it has asserted in this arbitration. Indeed, City
Oriente is seeking an order to have the Contract performed pursuant to
its original terms and conditions.... However, pending a decision on
this dispute, the principle that neither party may aggravate or
extend the dispute or take justice into their own hands prevails.
Consequently, Ecuador and Petroecuador shall continue to
comply with the obligations that they voluntarily undertook in
the Contract, pursuant to the agreed upon terms, and they must
refrain from declaring its termination. ...°

The City Oriente tribunal based its ruling on the conclusion that
“Article 47 of the Convention provides authorization for the passing of
provisional measures prohibiting any action that affects the disputed
rights, aggravates the dispute, frustrates the effectiveness of the future
award or entails having either party take justice into its own hands.”

The tribunal further held that neither Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention nor Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules require that
provisional measures be ordered only as a means to prevent irreparable
harm; urgency is the only requirement in Article 47. Specifically, the
tribunal stated:

First, the Tribunal has verified that neither Article 47 of the
Convention nor Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules require that
provisional measures be ordered only as a means to prevent
irreparable harm. The only requirement arising from the wording
of Rule 39 is the traditional urgency requirement...

Now, is there a second requirement to be fulfilled stating that
provisional measures must be necessary to prevent irreparable
harm? Rule 39 only refers to “circumstances that require such
measures.” It is the opinion of the Tribunal that this wording
requires only that provisional measures must not be ordered
lightly, but only as a last resort, after careful consideration of the

61 City Oriente, {| 57-66.
6 City Oriente, { 57 (emphasis added).
6 City Oriente, ¥ 55.
224 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

interests at stake, weighing the harm spared the petitioner and
the damage inflicted on the other party. It is not so essential that
provisional measures be necessary to prevent irreparable harm,
but that the harm spared the petitioner by such measures must be
significant and that it exceed greatly the damage caused to the
party affected thereby.

The City Oriente tribunal questioned the necessity requirement all
together and found that the harm must be “significant” rather than
“irreparable” to justify the issuance of interim measures under the ICSID
Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

In the end, the City Oriente tribunal granted the claimant’s request for
provisional measures to preserve the status quo since the claimant was
seeking specific performance, ie., “[an order] to have the contract
performed pursuant to its original terms and conditions.”©

In a more recent case, Quiborax S.A. v. Bolivia, the tribunal addressed
the specific application of provisional measures to order the respondent
State to stay its criminal investigation against the claimant. The Quiborax
tribunal emphasized that as a general rule investment tribunals should not
be reviewing the application of the State’s penal powers. According to the
Quiborax tribunal, the tribunal is “not in a position to determine” “whether
the criminal proceedings have a legitimate basis or not” and insisted that it
“does not question the sovereign rights of a State to conduct criminal
cases.”° As the Quiborax tribunal forcefully put it:

[T]he exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings does not extend to
criminal proceedings. Criminal proceedings deal with criminal
liability and not with investment disputes, and fall by definition
outside the scope of the Centre’s jurisdiction and the competence
of this Tribunal. Neither the ICSID Convention nor the BIT
contain any rule enjoining a State from exercising criminal
jurisdiction, nor do they exempt suspected criminals from
prosecution by virtue of their being investors.”

However, the Quiborax tribunal found the situation in that case to be
exceptional in that the respondent was investigating the claimant precisely

64 City Oriente Decision on Revocation, 4 {| 70-72.

65 City Oriente, {J 57-58 (November 19, 2007); see also City Oriente Decision on Revocation, {| 58:
City Oriente has a right that the status quo ante be maintained for as long as
these arbitration proceedings are pending, and that the Contract continues to
be regularly performed as agreed by the parties (as expressly required by
Clause 20.3.5 of the Contract) and it also has a right that Petroecuador and
Ecuador refrain from adopting any unilateral compulsory or coercive measure
impairing contractual balance.

66 Quiborax, J 163-64.

67 Quiborax, 9 129.
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 225

because the claimant had initiated the ICSID arbitration. The Quiborax
tribunal held that the rights to be preserved by provisional measures
extend to procedural rights, including the preservation of the status quo
and the non-aggravation of the dispute. In that case, the tribunal issued
provisional measures to stay the respondent's criminal investigation of the
claimant, including for alleged fraud and forgery of documents, holding
that “any harm caused to the integrity of the ICSID proceedings,
particularly with respect to a party’s access to evidence or the integrity of
the evidence produced could not be remedied by an award of damages.”°°
But, at the same time, the Quiborax tribunal was careful to emphasize that,
in conformity with the general rule that investment tribunals are in no
position to review the legitimacy of a State’s criminal proceedings, “a mere
stay of the criminal proceedings would not affect Respondent's
sovereignty nor require conduct in violation of national law.””

Although the Quiborax tribunal considered that an irreparable harm
is a harm that cannot be repaired by an award of damages,”! the tribunal
seemed to rely on the text of Article 17A of the 2006 UNCITRAL Model
Law. According to the tribunal, “this standard has been adopted by
several ICSID tribunals and embodied in Art. 17A of the UNCITRAL
Model Law.”” The tribunal explained the standard for issuing interim
measures as follows:

That provision [Article 17A of the UNCITRAL Model Law]
requires the party requesting an interim measure to satisfy the
tribunal that:

Harm not adequately repaired by an award of damages is likely to
result if the measure is not ordered, and such harm substantially
outweighs the harm that is likely to result to the party against
whom the measure is directed if the measure is granted.

Following this standard, Claimants submit that the provisional
measures requested are necessary because the harm caused would
not be adequately repaired by an award of damages. The Tribunal
agrees with Claimants in this respect: any harm caused to the
integrity of the ICSID proceedings, particularly with respect to a
party’s access to evidence or the integrity of the evidence produced
could not be remedied by an award of damages.

68 Quiborax, JJ 164-65.

69 Quiborax, JJ 157, 163.

70 Quiborax, § 165.

71 Quiborax, § 156.

2 Quiborax, { 156, citing City Oriente, Paushok and Burlington.
226 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

However, Claimants have accurately pointed out that the
necessity requirement requires the Tribunal to consider the
proportionality of the requested provisional measures. The
Tribunal must thus balance the harm caused to Claimants by the
criminal proceedings and the harm that would be caused to
Respondent if the proceedings were stayed or terminated.”

It follows that, under Quiborax, harm is “irreparable” and an interim
measure is therefore “necessary” when two conditions are met: (i) harm
caused would not be adequately repaired by an award of damages and (ii)
harm resulting from absence of interim measures to the claimant is greater
than harm to the respondent from their imposition.

In sum, the ICSID arbitration tribunals that have deviated from the
ICJ irreparable harm cases and put forward the alternative standard of
necessity based on the 2006 UNCITRAL Model Law have consistently
done so in special circumstances when monetary damages could not fully
remedy the harm. This is evident in cases such as City Oriente, Burlington
and Perenco, where there was the threat of destruction of the investment
and each respective claimant sought performance of the contract, and in
Quiborax, when the respondent’s measures threatened the integrity of the
arbitral proceedings by precluding claimant’s access to the necessary
evidence.

IV. ICJ CONCEPT OF “TRREPARABLE HARM” PREVAILS IN ICSID
JURISPRUDENCE

A. The Cemex Decision on Provisional Measures

In Cemex, claimants sought to restrain Venezuela from seizing vessels
which had been transferred from their Venezuelan subsidiary, Cemex
Venezuela, to a third party. Claimants sought orders for provisional
measures under the ICSID Convention, stating that “Venezuela should be
enjoined from further action that will increase the Claimants’ damages and
thus aggravate this dispute.””* The key legal issue of divergence between
the parties was “the kind of risk justifying” provisional measures.”

The Cemex tribunal rejected claimants’ request for provisional
measures, holding that under the circumstances such measures do not
meet the requirements of urgency and necessity under Article 47 of the
ICSID Convention and that the non-aggravation of the dispute principle
does not supplant meeting the necessity requirement.” Thus, applying the
irreparable damage or prejudice standard, the Cemex tribunal concluded

7% Quiborax, JJ 156-58.
7 Cemex, J 20.
7 Cemex, J 42.
76 Cemex, J 61.
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 227

that claimants’ alleged harm was not irreparable and thereby the
provisional measures were not necessary since, according to the claimants,
the only consequence of the seizure of the vessels would be a financial loss
and such loss could be readily compensated by a damages award.”

The Cemex tribunal determined that the applicable criterion for
necessity is the irreparable harm or prejudice. The tribunal dismissed
arguments criticizing the application of the ICJ irreparable harm standard
in ICSID arbitrations and contention that a lower threshold of harm
belongs in ICSID arbitration. The tribunal stated:

Thus, ICSID Tribunals, when considering government actions
which may well prove to have infringed a right and caused harm,
make a distinction between:

(a) situations where the alleged prejudice can be readily
compensated by awarding damages;

(b) and those where there is a serious risk of destruction of a
going concern that constitutes the investment.

In the first category of cases, provisional measures were denied
because of the absence of an “irreparable harm.” In the second
category of cases they were granted, the tribunals using other
standards -- although they could have based their decision on the
fact that, the destruction of the ongoing concern that constituted
the investment, would have created an “irreparable harm.” ....

... the Tribunal sees no reason not to retain the generally accepted
standard of “irreparable harm” as criterion for the “necessity”
required by Article 47 of the ICSID Convention...”

The Cemex tribunal reasoned that the concept of irreparable harm is a
governing rule because this is precisely the criterion “always required by
the International Court of Justice for provisional measures” under Article
41 of the Statute” and Article 47 of the ICSID Convention is “directly
inspired” by Article 41 of the ICJ Statute.

Reviewing both the ICJ and ICSID jurisprudence, the Cemex tribunal
refined the definition of irreparable harm or prejudice as damage that,
although capable of financial compensation, cannot be fully remedied by
it. The tribunal recognized that the rationale used by the ICJ jurisprudence
in cases concerning the danger of property destruction is also applicable in

7 Cemex, J 58.

7% Cemex, 55-56.

7 Cemex, J 40, 43 (citing Pulp Mills, J] 31-32; Passage through the Great Belt, J 23;
Certain Criminal Proceedings in France, J 22).

80 Cemex, § 39 (citing Pey Casado, J 2 and C. Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A
COMMENTARY, p. 759).
228 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

ICSID arbitrations as an example of the damage that, although capable of
financial compensation, cannot be fully remedied by it.8! In such cases,
ICSID tribunals distinguish the prejudice that can be easily compensated
by awarding damages from that prejudice that is posing a serious risk of
destruction to the investment.*

Specifically, the Cemex tribunal observed that in Plama the tribunal
accepted the respondent’s argument that harm is not irreparable if it can
be compensated for by damages, which was the only remedy the claimant
sought. It further observed that in Burlington, when the tribunal ordered
the establishment of an escrow account where the disputed funds could be
held pending the final award, the risk was greater than mere damages,
namely “the destruction of an ongoing investment and its revenue-
producing potential.” The Cemex tribunal also pointed out that, in Perenco,
the tribunal established an escrow account for the same purpose as in
Burlington, after concluding that the claimant cannot be “adequately
compensated by an award of damages” in light of the seizure of its assets
and oil production and the danger of destruction of its investment.®

The Cemex tribunal further reinforced its conclusion that the
irreparable harm standard is the general rule in ICSID arbitration by
specifically considering the Burlington and Perenco decisions. It reasoned
that even the Burlington and Perenco tribunals which purported to make
use of the UNICTRAL Model Law-derived criterion for necessity actually
support its conclusion, because the “harm not adequately reparable by an
award of damages” standard does “not differ in substance from the
standard of ‘irreparable damage’ generally used.”*+ In discussing these
cases, the Cemex tribunal observed that, under the test applied by the ICJ,
the Burlington and Perenco tribunals “could have based their decision on
the fact that, the destruction of the ongoing concern that constituted the
investment, would have created an ‘irreparable harm.’”® Essentially, the
Cemex tribunal concluded that this was a distinction without a difference:

81 Cemex, 9§ 47-48. The Cemex tribunal underlined that the ICJ granted provisional
measures even when monetary damages could be awarded in circumstances where “the
health or life of people and sometimes their properties were in jeopardy.” However, the
ICJ denied provisional measures in the Aegean Sea case because violation of the alleged
rights was “capable of reparation by appropriate means.”

8 Cemex, § 55; cf. Sarooshi, pp. 371-372 (arguing that the ICJ irreparable prejudice
requirements “is not applicable or even persuasive as a way of constructing necessity in
the context of ICSID” because “of the wholly different nature of the types of cases in
which the ICJ may be involved as compared to the investors-State claims that come
before ICSID Tribunals,” namely cases involving the legality on the use of military force,
boundary cases and cases over treatment of foreign property).

8 Cemex, J] 52-54.

84 Cemex, [] 45-47.

8 Cemex, J 55.
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 229

irreparable harm or prejudice precisely means damage that cannot be
adequately compensated by a monetary award.*°

B. Post-Cemex Decisions

The post-Cemex ICSID jurisprudence confirms the understanding that
the necessity of interim measures is determined by application of the
“irreparable harm” test. In Abaclat, for example, the tribunal held that “a
wide consensus has emerged in practice” that an order of provisional
measures requires inter alia “the risk of irreparable harm or prejudice in case
the measures are not granted.”*®” Citing the Cemex decision on provisional
measures with approval, the Tethyan tribunal observed that “pursuant to the
well-established jurisprudence of ICSID tribunals, provisional measures
may be granted where the situation is urgent and the requested measures
are necessary to preserve a party’s right from irreparable harm.”** The
tribunal further remarked that “[t]his test is in conformity with the practice
of the International Court of Justice (ICJ’) under Article 41 of its Statute, on
which Article 47 of the ICSID Convention is modeled.”®

When ICSID tribunals have been confronted with provisional
measures requests where the integrity of the arbitral proceedings has been

86 Moreover, the Cemex decision resolved the dispute over the relationship between the
“irreparable harm” and “non-aggravation of dispute” principle. The tribunal reasoned
that the mere fact that the ICJ had frequently issued provisional measures in order to
prevent aggravation or extension of the dispute does not serve as a criterion for
determining when a provisional measure is “necessary” while this is the function of
provisional measures, the criterion for their “necessity” is the assessment of
“irreparable” harm under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention - a requirement
independent from the aim to prevent the extension or aggravation of the dispute.
Rather, as the Cemex tribunal held, “the so-called principle of non-aggravation cannot
supplant the requirement of Article 47,” the provisional measures “cannot be granted on
the basis of the principle of non-aggravation alone.” See Cemex, { 61; see also Lao
Holdings, J 14-16 (relying on Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18,
Order No. 1, § 2 (July 1, 2003), the tribunal issued a preliminary order to prevent
aggravation of the dispute only after having satisfied itself that absent such an order
there was “a real and imminent risk that irreparable prejudice may be caused to the
rights in dispute” of the parties). Cf. Born pp. 2490-2491 (citing with approval cases to
support the proposition that the standard for interim measures is not the imminent
threat of irreparable harm but whether the complained-of actions are having a “serious
adverse effect” on the ability of a party to fully protect its rights in the judicial
proceedings, i.e., the general right to the maintenance of the status quo and the non-
aggravation of the dispute) and Sarooshi, pp. 378-379 (contending that “a lower
threshold than ‘irreparable prejudice’ - whether it is “significant harm’ to parties rights
or even a ‘threat’ to parties rights - is entirely appropriate and should be followed by
other ICSID Tribunals...”, Le., avoidance of the aggravation of the dispute).

87 Abaclat, Procedural Order No. 11, § 11.

88 Tethyan, { 118.

8 Tethyan, { 119.
230 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

the centerpiece of discussion, ICSID tribunals have applied the irreparable
harm requirement when determining whether the measure is necessary.

For instance, in Caratube, the claimant sought provisional measures to
stay criminal investigations during the course of the ICSID arbitration. The
tribunal refused to grant the provisional measures. According to the
tribunal, it was not necessary to issue provisional measures because the
claimant's ability to furnish evidence for the claim was not impaired given
the respondent’s undertaking to preserve all documents, including files and
computer disks and other materials the Kazakh authorities had taken from
claimant, to grant claimant access to all the documents it requested, and to
allow claimant to copy such documents and take them out of Kazakhstan.
The tribunal further explained that the claimant sought money damages, not
specific performance, which, as the tribunal emphasized, would have
triggered other considerations such as those discussed in the Burlington case.
The Caratube tribunal concluded by holding that:

[A]pplying Rule 39(1), the Tribunal does not find that the right
preserved is threatened. Claimant has not shown that its
procedural right to continue with the ICSID arbitration is
precluded by the criminal investigation... Regarding Claimant’s
substantive rights involved ... damage may be claimed, examined
and decided later in this case in the procedure on the merits. Since,
in the present case, Claimant is not claiming specific performance,
but money damages, this Tribunal does not have to deal with the
question whether other considerations have to be applied in
specific performance claims....?!

In Lao Holdings, the respondent filed a motion to amend a non-
aggravation clause in an earlier Provisional Measures Order (PMO) to
permit it to further its criminal investigation into the alleged illegal
conduct by the claimant and its employees, as well as the alleged
corruption of the officials of the respondent Government in connection
with the investment. The tribunal refused to grant the motion to modify
the non-aggravation clause and held that allowing the Laotian police and
prosecutors to pursue the criminal investigation by deposing witnesses
and collecting bank and audit documentation on the eve of the arbitration
hearing would “aggravate the dispute, by endangering the procedural
integrity of the arbitral proceedings.” The tribunal relied on Certain
Activities Carried out by Nicaragua in the Border Area (Costa Rica v. Nicaragua)
ICJ decision for the proposition that a party seeking a modification of the

so

° Caratube, [J 99-104, 137-139.
1 Caratube, 4 139.

° Lao Holdings, | 1, 26, 31.

% Lao Holdings, § 42.
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 231

provisional order must demonstrate urgency and necessity. Citing
Quiborax with approval, the tribunal reasoned that permitting the criminal
prosecution of the claimant to continue would be “highly disruptive” to
the claimant’s ability to present its case by hindering access to
documentary evidence and reducing potential willingness of witnesses to
cooperate with the ICSID proceedings.*

In Churchill the tribunal held that the necessity requirement for
enjoining the state’s criminal investigation against certain individuals not
parties to the dispute had not been fulfilled since the rights for which the
claimants sought provisional measures were not affected,” ie., the right to
exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings, preservation of the status quo and the
non-aggravation of the dispute, and the right to the procedural integrity of
the arbitral proceedings.” Although the claimants insisted on the
application of the “substantial harm” test for necessity and the respondent
argued for the “irreparable harm” standard, the tribunal did not
characterize the standard of harm.** Specifically, the tribunal found that
lodging criminal charges on the grounds of forgery of official documents
against companies that are not parties to the dispute does not threaten the
exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings.” The tribunal also found that the
right to non-aggravation of the dispute had not been violated because no
investigation had been initiated, no criminal charges had been filed against
the claimants themselves or their concurrent witnesses, and there was no
showing of any pressure or intimidation against the claimants and their
witnesses.! In this sense, the tribunal distinguished Quiborax since,

% Lao Holdings, J 50.

% Lao Holdings, { 72. It should be noted that in issuing the original PMO, “...the
Tribunal satisfied itself, as it was required to do, that in the absence of such an order
there was ‘a real and imminent risk that irreparable prejudice may be caused to the rights in the
dispute’ before a decision could be given on the merits...” Lao Holdings, { 16 (citing the
September 13, 2007 PMO) (emphasis added).

96 Churchill Procedural Order No. 9, JJ 102-103.

97 Churchill Procedural Order No. 9, JJ 10, 86-88, 92-95, 99.

9 Churchill Procedural Order No. 9, 4 70, 102-103. “The Tribunal can dispense with
entering into a discussion of the Parties’ arguments. Since in the present circumstances,
the rights for which the Claimants seek provisional measures are not affected, the
necessity requirement is consequently not fulfilled.”

9° Churchill Procedural Order No. 9, § 87. Specifically, the tribunal indicated: “As a
starting point, the Tribunal agrees with the Quiborax tribunal in that criminal
proceedings do not per se threaten the exclusivity of ICSID proceedings. This derives
from the fact that the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal
extend to investment disputes, ie. for present purposes, whether the Respondent
breached its international obligations under the UK-Indonesia BIT with respect to
Churchill Mining and under the Australia-Indonesia BIT with respect to Planet Mining,
and not to criminal proceedings, which fall outside the scope of the Centre’s jurisdiction
and the Tribunal’s competence.” [d., { 85.

100 Churchill Procedural Order No. 9, JJ 88, 92-95.
232 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

unlike factual circumstances in Churchill, Quiborax dealt with actual
criminal investigations against a co-claimant and persons involved in the
setting up of the investment. !°!

Interestingly, in a previous decision rendered by the same tribunal
concerning a different request for provisional measures, the tribunal held
that the necessity requirement under Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules “implies the existence of a risk of irreparable or substantial harm.”!°?
In that instance, it was the respondent State that had filed a request for
provisional measures to order the claimants to refrain from making false
statements in the media regarding the dispute and from approaching and
trying to persuade and induce any officials of the government of Indonesia
to settle the case outside the ICSID arbitration proceedings.!° The tribunal
articulated the requirements for granting provisional measures as follows:

There seems to be no disagreement between the Parties on the
requirements for provisional measures. According to Rule 39 of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the request must specify “the rights
to be preserved, the measures the recommendation of which is
requested, and the circumstances that require such measures”.
Various ICSID tribunals have interpreted these requirements to
mean that provisional measures must (i) serve to protect certain
rights of the applicant, (ii) meet the requirement of urgency; and
(iii) the requirement of necessity, which implies the existence of a risk of
irreparable or substantial harm.

The tribunal, however, did not satisfy the respondent’s request for
provisional measures. It held that the respondent had failed to identify
any right that may justify provisional measures and made insufficient
representations regarding urgency and the risk of “irreparable or serious
damage” as a result of the claimants’ complained-of conduct.!%

In sum, based on a survey of ICSID arbitration decisions following
the Cemex case, it is evident that the Cemex ruling clarified the meaning of
irreparable harm as a harm that cannot be readily compensated by an
award of damages and that it is the general requirement for a finding of
necessity of provisional measures under the ICSID Convention.

101 Churchill Procedural Order No. 9, J 99.

102 Churchill Procedural Order No. 3, § 42 (citing Plama, § 38; Burlington, § 51; Quiborax,
4 113; loan Micula, § 12).

103 Churchill Procedural Order No. 3, JJ 20-23.

104 Churchill Procedural Order No. 3, { 42 (emphasis added).

105 Churchill Procedural Order No. 3, JJ 49-56.
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 233
Vv. CONCLUSION

The Cemex decision and post-Cemex line of cases confirm that the
irreparable harm or prejudice is the governing criterion for necessity under
Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules and that the UNCITRAL lower-threshold harm standard has not
made serious inroads into ICSID arbitration.

Despite the debate over the necessity standard, ICSID case law shows
that irreparable harm is required for the granting of provisional measures
under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention, as confirmed by ICSID tribunals
following the ICJ’s persistent stance on the necessity standard. The Cemex
tribunal's strong reasoning in favor of maintaining the higher ICJ standard
of requirements for provisional measures, corroborated by the post-Cemex
case law, lay to rest the perception that ICSID tribunals are moving in the
direction of adopting a lower threshold test than the “irreparable harm”
standard.

Provisional measures in investment treaty arbitration warrant
caution because of their unique trait: such measures inherently encroach
on State sovereignty and restrict the exercise of its quintessential
regulatory powers. As such, the Cemex position eschewing the more
relaxed standard of necessity under the 2006 UNCITRAL Model Law is in
harmony with the extraordinary nature of provisional remedies directed
against States.
