niGe
« ft,

= We THE LAW AND PRACTICE OF INTERNATIONAL ONS
BRILL COURTS AND TRIBUNALS £6 (2017) 159-184
NIJHOFF brillcom/lape

Provisional Measures in 1csip Arbitration
from “Wonderland’s Jurisprudence’ to Informal
Modification of Treaties

Tarcisio Gazzini
University of Lausanne, Switzerland

Tarcisio.Gazzini@unilch

Robert Kolb
University of Geneva, Switzerland
Robert. Kolb@unige.ch

Abstract

Since 1999, 1CS1D tribunals have almost systematically held that they have the power
not only to recommend but also to order provisional measures under Article 47 of the
ics Convention and Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules. This article argues that the legal
argamentts offered by these tribunals are often mot fully elaborated and in any case not
entirely convincing. {t then provides an altemative reading of the decisions relating to
the mandatory character of provisional measures, in the sense that they imply a signifi-
cant departure from the meaning the contracting parties recorded in the treaty. Yet, as
the majority of tcsip members have endorsed, accepted or at least acquiesced in such
departure, it appears that Article 47 of the 1¢sip Convention has been informally rodi-

fed through subsequent practice.
Keywords

provisional measures - Icsip Convention - investment arbitration - treaty

interpretation — modification of treaties

© KONINKLIJKE BRILL NV, LEIDEN, 2017 | 0:01 10.1163/15738034-12341

160 GAZZINI AND KOLB
I Introduction

In a long stream of substantially identical decisions starting with Maffezini v.
Spain,! ICSID tribunals have upheld their power to order provisional measures
under Article 47 of the Ics1p Convention. Since Article 47 of the IcsID
Convention expressly authorizes IcsID tribunals only to recommend such
measures, it is worth examining the significance and implications of these de-
cisions from the standpoint of the law of treaties.

The article first offers a concise discussion of the nature and role of provi-
sional measures in the settlement of international disputes, before reviewing
the leading cases of the International Court of Justice (Icy) and other inter-
national tribunals (sections 11 to Iv). It then briefly describes the emergence
of what appears to be a jurisprudence constante in ICSID investment arbitra-
tion (section v) and examines the persuasiveness of the underlying legal rea-
soning (section VI). Section vi! is dedicated to the attitudes of IcsID members
with regard to these decisions. The final objective of the article is to appraise
the impact of the concordant body of decisions in combination with the (lack
of) reaction of Member States to the 1cs1D Convention from the standpoint of
the interpretation and possibly the informal modification of Article 47.

The discussion is limited to the alleged competence of Ics1D tribunals to
order provisional measures. It does not deal with the relationship between
provisional measures and jurisdiction nor the conditions under which provi-
sional measures can be granted.

II Provisional Measures in the Settlement of International Disputes

When a case is filed before an international tribunal, the object of the whole
procedure is to settle the dispute and to grant effective remedies to the parties
to the extent the claims, and possibly the counterclaims, brought forward are
considered to have merit. The dispute concerns a network of material or im-
material goods as well as subjective legal situations (rights and obligations). In
the nature of things, the procedure takes some time and tribunals may grant
interim protection or provisional measures, the purpose of which is “to pre-
serve the respective rights of the Parties, pending a decision of the Court, and

1 See infra note 33.

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 161

presupposes that irreparable prejudice shall not be caused to rights which are
the subject of dispute in judicial proceedings”?

Provisional measures normally set up duties of abstention rather than call-
ing upon the parties to perform possibly onerous actions. They are not made
the object of a judgment. The latter is a jurisdictional act covered by the force
of res judicata and flows from a contentious procedure during which the com-
peting arguments of the parties are heard and the court decides on the claim.
Provisional measures are rather pronounced through an order (ordonnance).
This entails that in cases of urgency there is no need to go through the parties’
arguments as ordinarily set out in written pleadings and presented at hearings.
This course of procedure gives the matter the necessary flexibility: provisional
measures can be altered during the proceedings and new ones can be granted.
There is no res judicata attached to such measures,? with the possible excep-
tion that an arbitral tribunal would violate procedural public policy if it de-
parted from opinions expressed in a preliminary award rendered in the same
case.* When the tribunal declines to exercise its jurisdiction or delivers the
final judgment, the provisional measures automatically lose their function and
expire. The “interim” protection thus gives way to the substantive “final” pro-
tection of the rights and obligations at stake.

Although provisional measures are normally requested by the parties,° the
issue of interim protection may also be raised in the interest of the tribunal in
the proper administration of justice and effectiveness of the proceedings of
which it is seized. If the final judgment’s impact can be impaired by actions
of the parties while the dispute is pending, the prestige of the tribunal and the
effectiveness of its adjudication process could be heavily jeopardized. That is

2 Land and Maritime Boundary between Cameroon and Nigeria, Provisional Measures, Order of
15 March 1996, I.C.J. Reports 1996, p. 13, para. 35.

3 See C. Schreuer with L. Malintoppi, A. Reinisch, A. Sinclair, The ICSID Convention. A
Commentary (2nd ed., 2009), 774-775. In Pey Casado v. Chile, infra note 33, para. 14, the tri-
bunal held that “[i]l y a lieu d’ajouter que les mesures conservatoires, qui sont du reste pro-
visoires par nature et par définition (comme l|’observe avec raison la Partie défenderesse),
peuvent étre modifiées ou annulées en tout temps par le Tribunal, ne jouissent pas de la force
de res judicata [...]”.

4 Swiss Supreme Court, Decision 4A_606/2013, 2 September 2014, as reported by P. Bartsch, A.
Truttmann, Swiss Supreme Court Clarifies Res Judicata Effect of Preliminary Award Rendered
by same Arbitrators in same Proceedings, at http://www.swlegal.ch/getdoc/9923adda-688b
-ge6e-8c4f-d4331ee7e48b/2014_ Philippe-Baertsch_Aileen-Truttmann_Swiss-Supr.aspx.

5 Such a demand can be presented at any time during the proceedings. For the IcJ, see Article
73 (1), Rules of Court (1978).

LAPE 16 (2017) 159-184 Downloaded from Brill.com06/06/201 9 05:28:31 AM

via Leiden University
162 GAZZINI AND KOLB

the reason why provisional measures can also be taken by tribunals on their
own authority (proprio motu).®

With regard to the binding effect of provisional measures, there are two
schools of thought.” On one hand, it has been argued, with regard to the pro-
visional measures indicated by the 1cj, that their binding character is func-
tionally indispensable as otherwise the very object of the entire proceedings,
namely the protection of the parties’ rights, would be frustrated. The argument
is further buttressed by the principle of good faith in the sense that, once the
parties have accepted the tribunal’s jurisdiction, they also assume certain
accessory obligations which are necessary to enable the tribunal to fully dis-
charge its mission.’ The binding nature of provisional measures has also been
considered as inherent to the tribunal’s function or dictated by logic.9

On the other hand, some authors have maintained that there is no neces-
sary symmetry between the final judgment and provisional measures. Inspired
by the principle that the sovereignty of States should not be limited without a
clear legal entitlement to do so, and fearing that a bold course on provisional
measures could discourage States to accept the jurisdiction of the Icj, they
have argued that these measures ought to be considered non-binding unless

6 For the IcjJ, see Article 75 (1), Rules of Court (1978).

7 For a full discussion, see R. Kolb, La bonne foi en droit international public (2000), 608 ff.,
or The International Court of Justice (2013), esp. 641-645.

8 See, in particular, L. Daniele, Le misure cautelari nel processo dinanzi alla Corte
Internazionale di Giustizia (1993), esp. 150. In Quiborax v. Bolivia, infra note 33, para. 592,
the tribunal held that “The principle of good faith involves the duty not to perform any act
that would defeat the object and purpose of the obligation that has been undertaken by
the parties, even if the act itself is not expressly prohibited by the provisions of the treaty”
(footnote omitted).

9 According to G.G. Fitzmaurice, “The Law and Procedure of the International Court of
Justice, 1951-1954”, 34 British Yearbook of International Law (1958), 1, 122, “the whole logic
of the jurisdiction to indicate interim measures entails that, when indicated, they are
binding — for this jurisdiction is based on the absolute necessity, when the circumstances
call for it, of being able to preserve, and to avoid prejudice to, the rights of any par-
ties, as determined by the final judgment of the Court”. See also L. Collins, “Provisional
and Protective Measures in International Litigation’, 234 Recueil des Cours (1992-111),
9; L. Gross, “Some Observations on Provisional Measures”, in Y. Dinstein et al. (eds.),
International Law at a Time of Perplexity. Essays in Honour of S. Rosenne (1989), 307;
K. Oellers-Frahm, “Article 41”, in A. Zimmermann, C. Tomuschat, K. Oellers-Frahm,
CJ. Tams (eds.), The Statute of the International Court of Justice, A Commentary (2nd ed.,
2012), 1038.

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 163

the court or tribunal has been conferred the power to attach to them a binding
character.!°

III Jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice

According to Article 41 (1) of its Statute, the 1cj “shall have the power to indi-
cate, if it considers that circumstances so require, any provisional measures
which ought to be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party”.
Prior to 2001, there was a “profound divergence in the views of authoritative
commentators” as to whether provisional measures are binding.’* The wording
of the Statute is all but clear. The question of the binding nature of provisional
measures was deliberately left open at the drafting stage of the Statute of the
Permanent Court of International Justice (PCIJ) in 1920. The word “indicate”
rather than “order” or “decide” may suggest non-mandatory measures; but, in
reality, the word is compatible with either interpretation, since it is neutral.
The words “ought to be taken” rather than “shall be taken” may also suggest
some non-binding feature; but the corresponding French wording, predomi-
nant in 1920, reads “doivent étre prises’, which conveys the idea of a binding
character.

The practice of the Court was not conclusive for many years. Since no State
requested a sanction for non-observance of provisional measures, the Court
took only an oblique position on the question.’ In addition, the practice of
States was inconclusive: some provisional injunctions were heeded by the

10 _ See, in particular, J. Sztucki, Interim Measures in The Hague Court (1983); H. Thirlway, “The
Indication of Provisional Measures by the ICJ”, in R. Bernhardt (ed.), Provisional Measures
Indicated by International Courts (1994), 1.

11 +The other authentic text reads “La Cour a le pouvoir d’indiquer, si elle estime que les
circonstances l’exigent, quelles mesures conservatoires du droit de chacun doivent étre
prises a titre provisoire”. In doctrine, see, in particular, $. Rosenne, Provisional Measures in
International Law: The International Court of Justice and the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea (2005); K. Oellers-Frahm, supra note 9, 1062-1069; J.J. Quintana, Litigation
at the International Court of Justice (2015), Chapter 1.

12 R. Kolb, International Court of Justice, supra note 7, 644. See also L. Collins, supra note 9,
esp. 216 ff.; S. Rosenne, supra note 1, esp. 34 ff.

13. In Vienna Convention on Consular Relations (Paraguay v. United States of America),
Provisional Measures, Order of 9 April 1998, I.C.J. Reports 1998, p. 248, para. 41, the Court
held that the “United States should take all measures”. The French text more clearly reads:
“Les Etats-Unis doivent prendre toutes les mesures”.

LAPE 16 (2017) 159-184 Downloaded from Brill.com06/06/201 9 05:28:31 AM

via Leiden University
164 GAZZINI AND KOLB

concerned party, while many other injunctions were finally not carried out.*
There was thus no clear opinio juris on the matter.
The situation changed in 2001 when the Icy found that

[i]t follows from the object and purpose of the Statute, as well as from
the terms of Article 41 when read in their context, that the power to indi-
cate provisional measures entails that such measures should be binding,
inasmuch as the power in question is based on the necessity, when the
circumstances call for it, to safeguard, and to avoid prejudice to, the rights
of the parties as determined by the final judgment of the Court.!®

The main point, according to the Court, is to preserve to the full extent its own
ability to properly fulfil its judicial function. The finding was consistently reit-
erated in subsequent decisions.

In 2007, the 1cj further held that the finding in the LaGrand decision on
the mandatory character of provisional measures merely clarified (rather than
developed) the meaning that Article 41 of the Statute had always had, with
the consequence that it was applicable to measures adopted before 2001. It
observed that

its ‘orders on provisional measures under Article 41 [of the Statute] have
binding effect’ (LaGrand [...]). Although the Court only had occasion to
make such a finding in a judgment subsequent to the Orders that it made
in the present dispute, this does not affect the binding nature of those
Orders, since in the Judgment referred to the Court did no more than give
the provisions of the Statute the meaning and scope that they had pos-
sessed from the outset. It notes that provisional measures are aimed at
preserving the rights of each of the parties pending the final decision of
the Court. The Court’s Orders of 8 April and 13 September 1993 indicating

14 K. Oellers-Frahm, supra note 9, 1065-1066.

15 LaGrand (Germany v. United States of America), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2001, p. 466, para.
102. In the literature, see, in particular, R.Y. Jennings, “The LaGrand Case’, 1 The Law and
Practice of International Courts and Tribunals (2002), 50; C. Tams, M. Memmecke, “The
LaGrand Case’, 51 International and Comparative Law Quarterly (2002), 449; R. Sloane,
“Measures Necessary to Ensure: The I1cJ’s Provisional Measures Order in Avena and Other
Mexican Nationals’, 17 Leiden Journal of International Law (2004), 673; R. Kolb, “Note
on the New International Case-Law Concerning the Binding Character of Provisional
Measures’, 74 Nordic Journal of International Law (2005), 117.

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 165

provisional measures created legal obligations which both Parties were
required to satisfy.1©

This statement might obscure rather than clarify the role of the Court. Article
41 of the Statute as it originally stood left the question of the binding nature
of such measures entirely open. The drafting history, the text or the practice of
the Court in its formative years do not yield any clear answers to the question.
Thus, the 2001 decision is in reality a piece of legal craftsmanship based on te-
leological and effectiveness considerations, with the aim of strengthening the
judicial process at the cj and not losing ground with respect to tribunals, such
as the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS), which possess the
power to indicate binding provisional measures.

The Court modestly veiled this part of judicial creativity by hiding
behind the classic positivistic canon whereby the decision taken flows from
the applicable norm in its original complexion. Lex semper loquitur. This fic-
tion has perhaps a certain importance in international law where sovereign
States are particularly sensitive to inroads into their sovereignty. Its function is
to reassure States about the “proper behaviour” of the 1cJ, which purportedly
does not seek to carve out from the Statute more powers than States (origi-
nally) granted to it. But it stands to reason that institutional texts, as much as
others, must not be interpreted only in the light of their historical sense. The
interpreter can take into account later developments and engage in objective
or dynamic interpretation of the meaning a provision should have today. This
the Court did; and on that account it cannot be blamed.

Another aspect of the matter needs to be noted. Often, the analysis stops
with the finding that provisional measures under Article 41 of the Icj Statute
have legally binding character. Apart from the fact that the cj could also issue
non-binding measures if it found that through an appropriate course (who can
do more can do less), little room is devoted to the exact consequences of that
finding. It has been argued that the statement of the Court in LaGrand is disas-
trous since it might affect the readiness of States to submit their disputes to the
Court.!” This classic argument, used every time the Court has not deferred to
the whims and wishes of a State, has no great weight: since 2001, there has been
no significant change in the submission of cases to the Court.

16 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
(Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2007, p. 43,
para. 452.

17. ‘See H. Thirlway, “The Law and Procedure of the International Court of Justice, 1960-1989
(Part Twelve)”, 72 British Yearbook of International Law (2001), 37, at 126.

LAPE 16 (2017) 159-184 Downloaded from Brill.com06/06/201 9 05:28:31 AM

via Leiden University
166 GAZZINI AND KOLB

But taking now a look from another perspective, the question remains as to
what consequences the breach of the provisional injunction entails. As with
any breach of international obligations, non-compliance with binding pro-
visional measures engages international responsibility and triggers the duty
to make reparation.® With regard to the form of reparation, in particular, a
perusal of the recent practice shows that the Court limits itself to granting
satisfaction for the breach of such measures through a finding in its reasoning
and one operative paragraph. In other words, the Court states in its judgment
on the merits that the concerned State has breached the obligation to execute
the provisional measures. The Court even refused to burden the wrongfully be-
having State with procedural costs under Article 64 of the Statute, with regard
to additional costs provoked by the breach of these measures (e.g. additional
pleadings for other provisional measures).!° This is hardly an incentive to hon-
our such measures.

The Court should endeavour to give more teeth to its binding measures
under Article 41 of the Statute. One option would be to place procedural costs
on the party at fault under a new interpretation of Article 64 of the Statute.
Another option would be to impose specific duties of restitution or of compen-
sation for all the proximate (as opposed to incidental or remote) consequences
of the unlawful act. Still another option would be to elaborate a specific set of
consequences for that type of unlawful act, e.g. certain procedural disadvan-
tages for the State at fault, thus, that State would not receive certain benefits
as long as it had not executed the measures. It also stands to reason that these
approaches could be combined. For the time being, the Court seems to be re-
maining extremely cautious in this regard. It seems to have been impressed
about the leap it dared to take in 2001 and therefore desirous of waiting for
some time to pass before carrying further ahead on this subject matter.

IV Other International Tribunals

Although a review of the law and practice of international tribunals with re-
gard to provisional measures is clearly beyond the scope of this article, it is

18 See Articles 28 ff. of the International Law Commission's Draft Articles on Responsibility of
States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, UN Doc. A/56/10, 2001.

19 See, in particular, Certain Activities Carried out by Nicaragua in the Border Area (Costa Rica
v. Nicaragua), Judgment, 15 December 2015, para. 127, and, as to procedural costs, para. 144.
The decision has been rightly criticized by Judges Tomka, Greenwood, Sebutinde and
Judge ad hoc Dugard.

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 167

worth briefly discussing the provisions contained in some international legal
instruments related to the settlement of international disputes. In some of
them, the binding nature of these measures is uncontroversial. This is the case,
in particular, of Article 290 of the Law of the Sea Convention of 1982, which
provides that “the court or tribunal may prescribe any provisional measures
which it considers appropriate under the circumstances to preserve the re-
spective rights of the parties to the dispute or to prevent serious harm to the
marine environment, pending the final decision’.2°

In the same vein, Article 33 (1) of the Revised General Act for the Pacific
Settlement of International Disputes reads “the International Court of Justice,
acting in accordance with Article 41 of its Statute, or the Arbitral Tribunal, shall
lay down within the shortest possible time the provisional measures to be ad-
opted. The parties to the dispute shall be bound to accept such measures”.”!

Similarly, Article 63 (2) of the American Convention on Human Rights and
Rule 25 of the Rules of Procedure of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
leave no doubt about the binding nature of provisional measures. Article 63 (2)
provides that “in cases of extreme gravity and urgency, and when necessary to
avoid irreparable damage to persons, the Court shall adopt such provisional
measures as it deems pertinent in matters it has under consideration’, whereas
under Rule 25 the Court “may, at the request of a party or on its own motion,
order such provisional measures as it deems pertinent”. The Inter-American
Court has consistently indicated that compliance with provisional measures is
necessary to ensure the effectiveness of its decisions on the merits and has not
hesitated to order the concerned State to adopt provisional measures.??

The binding nature of provisional measures under the European Convention
on Human Rights, on the contrary, has been controversial for several years.

20 P. Tomka, G.I. Hernandez, “Provisional Measures in the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea’, in H.P. Hestermeyer et al. (eds.), Coexistence, Cooperation and Solidarity. Liber
Amicorum R. Wolfrum (2012), Vol. 11, 1763. See PCA Case No. 2015-28, The “Erica Lexie”
Incident (Italy v. India), Request for the Prescription of Provisional Measures, 29 April
2016, esp. paras. 72, 120 and 132, at https://pcacases.com/web/sendAttach/1707. An identi-
cal provision can be found in Article 31.1 of the European Convention for the Peaceful
Settlement of Disputes.

21 +The authentic French text reads: “la Cour International de Justice, statuant conformé-
ment a l’Article 41 de son Statut, ou le Tribunal arbitral, indiquera, dans le plus bref délai
possible, quelles mesures provisoires doivent étre prises. Les parties en litige seront
tenues de s’y conformer’.

22 Fora recent example, see Order of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights of May 29,
2013. Provisional Measures with regard to El Salvador Matter of B, available at http://www
.corteidh.or.cr/docs/medidas/B_se_o1_ing.pdf.

LAPE 16 (2017) 159-184 Downloaded from Brill.com06/06/201 9 05:28:31 AM

via Leiden University
168 GAZZINI AND KOLB

Neither the Convention nor its Protocols expressly refer to provisional mea-
sures. In 1991, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) held by a ten to
nine majority that the (then) European Commission of Human Rights had not
been bestowed by the Convention with the power to adopt mandatory provi-
sional measures.?3

On 17 June and 8 July 2002, the European Court of Human Rights inserted
Rule 39 according to which the Court may, at the request of a party or of any
other person concerned, or of its own motion, indicate to the parties any inter-
im measure which it considers should be adopted in the interests of the parties
or of the proper conduct of the proceedings. Although Rule 39 is not drafted in
clear, mandatory terms, in 2003, the European Court of Human Rights followed
without hesitation the 1cyj decision in LaGrand and held that:

[interim measures] enable the State concerned to discharge its obliga-
tion to comply with the final judgment of the Court, which is legally
binding by virtue of Article 46 of the Convention. [...] any State Party
to the Convention to which interim measures have been indicated in
order to avoid irreparable harm being caused to the victim of an alleged
violation must comply with those measures and refrain from any act or
omission that will undermine the authority and effectiveness of the final
judgment.?+#

Two years later, the Grand Chamber upheld the finding and definitively settled
the question.?> It must nonetheless be noted that three judges dissented and
argued that

23 Cruz Varas and Others v. Sweden, No. 15576/89, Judgment, 20 March 1991, paras. 102—
103. Rule 36 of the Rules of the European Commission on Human Rights reads: “The
Commission, or when it is not in session, the President may indicate to the parties any
interim measure the adoption of which seems desirable in the interest of the parties or
the proper conduct of the proceedings before it”.

24 Mamatkulov and Abdurasulovic v. Turkey, No. 46827/99 and 46951/99, Judgment,
6 February 2003, paras. 104—110.

25 Mamatkulov and Askarov v. Turkey, No. 46827/99 and 46951/99, Grand Chamber,
4 February 2005. The Court concluded that “[a] failure by a Contracting State to comply
with interim measures is to be regarded as preventing the Court from effectively examin-
ing the applicant’s complaint and as hindering the effective exercise of his or her right
and, accordingly, as a violation of Article 34” (para. 128). On these decisions, see C.J. Tams,
“Interim Orders by the ECTHR — Comments on Mamatkulov and Abdurasulovic v. Turkey’,
63 Zeitschrift fiir ausldndisches 6ffentliches Recht und Vélkerrecht (2003), 681; K. Oellers-
Frahm, “Verbindlichkeit einstweiliger Massnahmen: Der EMGR vollzieht — endlich — die

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 169

neither Article 26 (d) of that Convention, empowering the Court to enact
Rules of Procedure, nor Article 34, instituting the right of individual appli-
cation, is sufficiently connected to the issue under consideration to fill a
‘gap’ in the Convention by instituting binding interim measures ex nihilo,
thereby imposing on the States Parties to the Convention an obligation
without their consent. In other words, there is a big difference between
a simple interpretation of a treaty and its amendment, or between the
exercise of the judicial role and international legislation.7°

Since then, the ECtHR has systematically reiterated its position on the binding
nature of provisional measures. In a recent case, for instance, it stressed

the special importance attached to interim measures in the Convention
system. Their purpose is not only to enable an effective examination of
the application to be carried out but also to ensure that the protection
afforded to the applicant by the Convention is effective; such measures
subsequently allow the Committee of Ministers to supervise the execu-
tion of the final judgment. Interim measures thus enable the State con-
cerned to discharge its obligation to comply with the final judgment of the
Court, which is legally binding by virtue of Article 46 of the Convention.?”

Yet, the binding nature of provisional measures has not gone unchallenged and
States have occasionally refused to comply with them.?8 In Amiroyv v. Russia, for
instance, the respondent government challenged the legally binding force of
the provisional measures and argued that the power to issue such measures
cannot be drawn from Article 34 of the Convention or from any other source.”°

The developments related to the European Convention on Human Rights
further confirm the tendency to affirm the binding character of provisional
measures under the different schemes of international adjudication that exist.
It has been argued that a general principle of international law has emerged

erforderliche Wende in seiner Rechtsprechung”, 30 Europdische Grundrechte Zeitschrift
(2003), 689; G. Cohen-Jonathan, “Sur la force obligatoire des mesures provisoires. Larrét
de la Grande Chambre européenne du 4 février 2005”, 109 Revue Générale de Droit
International Public (2005), 421.

26 Mamatkulov and Askarov v. Turkey, supra note 25, Joint Partly Dissenting Opinion of
Judges Caflisch, Tirmen and Kovler, para. 11.

27 Amirov v. Russia, No. 51857/13, Judgment, 27 November 2014, para. 66.

28 See, in particular, W.A. Schabas, The European Convention on Human Rights (2015),
750-751.

29 Amirov v. Russia, supra note 27, para. 62.

LAPE 16 (2017) 159-184 Downloaded from Brill.com06/06/201 9 05:28:31 AM

via Leiden University
170 GAZZINI AND KOLB

and that any standing international jurisdiction should be presumed to have
the power to issue binding provisional measures when they are entitled to “in-

dicate’, “order”, “prescribe” or “adopt” such measures.*° It is against this back-
ground that the IcsID jurisprudence has to be appreciated.

Vv Decisions by 1cs1D Tribunals

The adoption of provisional measures by IcsID tribunals is governed by Article
47 of the IcSID Convention and further defined in Rule 39 of the Arbitration
Rules.*! In accordance with Article 47 of the IcsID Convention, a tribunal
“may, if it considers the circumstances so require, recommend any provisional
measures which should be taken to preserve the respective interests of either
party” (emphasis added). In the other two authentic languages, namely French
and Spanish, Article 47 reads respectively: “le Tribunal peut, s’il estime que les
circonstances l’exigent, recommander toutes mesures conservatoires propres a
sauvegarder les droits des parties” (emphasis added); and “el Tribunal, si con-
sidera que las circunstancias asi lo requieren, podra recomendar la adopci6n
de aquellas medidas provisionales que considere necesarias para salvaguardar
los respectivos derechos de las partes”.
Under Rule 39 of the Arbitral Rules, in turn,

a party may request that provisional measures for the preservation of
its rights be recommended by the Tribunal. The request shall specify the
rights to be preserved, the measures the recommendation of which is
requested, and the circumstances that require such measures (emphasis
added).

30 ~=— A. Tzanakopoulos, “Provisional Measures Indicated by International Courts: Emergence
of a General Principle of International Law’, 57 Revue Hellenique de droit international
(2004), 53.

31 In the literature, see, in particular, Z. Mavrogordato, G. Sidere, “The Nature and
Enforceability of ICSID Provisional Measures”, 75 Arbitration (2009), 38; G. Kaufmann-
Kohler, A. Antonietti, “Interim Relief in International Investment Agreements’, in
K. Yannaca-Small (ed.), Arbitration under International Investment Agreements: An
Analysis of the Key Procedural, Jurisdictional and Substantive Issues (2010), 530; D. Sarooshi,
“Provisional Measures and Investment Treaty Arbitration”, 29 Arbitration International
(2013), 361; S. Luttrell, “ICSID Provisional Measures ‘In the Round’’, 31 Arbitration
International (2015), 393; B. Stern, “Interim/Provisional Measures, Occidental v. Ecuador,
ICSID ARB/o6/11’, in M. Kinnear et al. (eds.), Building International Investment Law. The
First 50 Years of ICSID (2016), 627.

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 171

While the French version perfectly coincides with the English one,** the
Spanish version contains a significant difference as it reads

cualquiera de las partes [...] puede solicitar que el Tribunal recomiende la
adopcion de medidas provisionales para la salvaguardia de sus derechos.
La solicitud debera especificar los derechos que se salvaguardaran, las
medidas cuya recomendacion se pide, y las circunstancias que hacen
necesaria la dictacién de tales medidas (emphasis added).

Article 47 of the Ics1D Convention and Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules stand
in sharp contrast with Article 26 (1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules under
which arbitral tribunals may, at the request of a party, grant interim measures.

With one exception, all tribunals that have dealt with this issue have held
that, under Article 47 of the 1cstD Convention and Rule 39 of the Arbitration
Rules, they have been conferred the power not only to recommend but also to
bind the parties with regard to provisional measures.** In Maffezini v. Spain,

32 ‘The French text reads: “une partie peut [...] requérir que des mesures provisoires pour
la conservation de ses droits soient recommandees par le Tribunal. La requéte spécifie
les droits devant étre préservés, les mesures dont la recommandation est sollicitée et les
circonstances qui rendent ces mesures nécessaires” (emphasis added).

33 Amongst the many decisions in this sense, see Maffeziniv. Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/7,
Procedural Order No. 2, 28 October 1999, para. 9; Pey Casado and President Allende
Foundation v. Chile, 1cS1D Case No. ARB/98/2, Provisional Measures, 25 September 2001,
paras. 19-20; Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, 1cS1D Case No. ARB/o2/18, Procedural Order No. 1,
1 July 2003, para. 4; Azurix v. Argentina, IcSID Case No. ARB/o1/12, Provisional Measures,
6 August 2003, paras. 30-31; Occidental v. Ecuador, 1cS1D Case No. ARB/06/11, Provisional
Measures, 17 August 2007, para. 58; City Oriente Ltd v. Ecuador and Empresa Estatal de
Petroleos del Ecuador, icsip Case No. ARB/o6/21, Provisional Measures, 19 November
2007, para. 52; Perenco Ecuador Limited v. Ecuador, 1cS1D Case No. ARB/o8/6, Provisional
Measures, 8 May 2009, para. 43; Burlington Resources Inc. v. Ecuador, 1cSID Case No.
ARB/08/5, Provisional Measures, 29 June 2009, paras. 62 ff.; Quiborax S.A. and Non-Metallic
Minerals S.A. v. Bolivia, 1cS1D Case No. ARB/06/2, Provisional Measures, 26 February 2010,
para. 108, and Award, 15 September 2015, paras. 578-579; Spyridon Roussalis v. Romania,
IcsID Case No. ARB/o6/1, Award, 7 December 2011, paras. 24 and 29 (Decision on provi-
sional measures (not public)); Tethyan v. Pakistan, 1CS1D Case No. ARB/12/1, Provisional
Measures, 13 December 2012, para. 120; RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/12/10, Request for Security for Costs, 13 August 2014, para. 48; PNG Sustainable
Development Program Ltd. v. Papua New Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33, Provisional
Measures, 15 January 2015, para. 102; Transglobal Green Energy, LLc and Transglobal Green
Energy de Panama, S.A. v. Panama, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28, Provisional Measures,
21 January 2016, para. 25; Valle Verde Sociedad Financiera S.L. v. Venezuela, 1CSID Case No.

LAPE 16 (2017) 159-184 Downloaded from Brill.com06/06/201 9 05:28:31 AM

via Leiden University
172 GAZZINI AND KOLB

the tribunal for the first time addressed the question of the hortatory or man-
datory character of provisional measures. It took into account only the English
and Spanish versions and focused on Rule 39. It held that

[while there is a semantic difference between the word ‘recommend’ as
used in Rule 39 and the word ‘order’ as used elsewhere in the Rules to
describe the Tribunal’s ability to require a party to take a certain action,
the difference is more apparent than real. It should be noted that the
Spanish text of that Rule uses also the word ‘dictacién’ The Tribunal does
not believe that the parties to the Convention meant to create a substan-
tial difference in the effect of these two words. The Tribunal’s authority to
rule on provisional measures is no less binding than that of a final award.
Accordingly, for the purposes of this Order, the Tribunal deems the word
‘recommend’ to be of equivalent value as the word ‘order’.3*

After the decision in LaGrand was delivered, several ICSID tribunals shared the
teleological argument developed by the cj with regard to Article 41 of the IcJ
Statute. In Pey Casado v. Chile, in particular, the tribunal opined that Article 47
of the 1cs1D Convention was modelled (“directement inspiré”) on Article 41 of
the Icy Statute.°> It borrowed the teleological argument developed by the Icj
in LaGrand to uphold the mandatory character of provisional measures on the
need to preserve the (possible) execution of the pending decision on the mer-
its and to prevent that a party’s acts or omissions could undermine the rights
of the other party.?° In Perenco v. Ecuador, the tribunal also included in the
equation the term “request”, which appears in ICsID Arbitration Rule 39, and
concluded that “[t]he parallels between ‘recommend’ in the Ics1D Convention

ARB/12/18, Provisional Measures, 25 January 2016, para. 75; United Utilities (Tallinn) B.V.
and Aktsiaselts Tallinna Vesi v. Estonia, 1cS1D Case No. ARB/14/24, Provisional Measures,
12 May 2016, para. 109.

34  Maffezini v. Spain, supra note 33, para. 9. Other tribunals emphasised the importance of
the verb ‘dictar’ used in the Spanish text, see, for instance, Transglobal v. Panama, supra
note 33, para. 25.

35 Pey Casado v. Chile, supra note 33, para. 2, quoted with approval by other tribunals, i.e.
CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. and CEMEX Caracas II Investments B.V. v. Bolivia, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/08/15, Provisional Measures, 10 March 2010, para. 39. In City Oriente Ltd
v. Ecuador, supra note 33, para. 53, the tribunal held that “[i]n any event, whatever the
meaning ascribed to such words, a failure to comply with orders given to Respondents
by the Tribunal in accordance with Article 47 of the Convention will entail a violation of
Article 26 thereof, and engage Respondents’ liability”.

36 ~—- Pey Casado v. Chile, supra note 33, paras. 19-20.

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 173

and ‘indicate’ in the Icy Statute are quite clear, suggesting that one cannot
rightly assume that a ‘request’ is comparatively weaker than a ‘recommenda-
tion’, or that neither is binding”.3”

The argument was fortified by a reference to the principle that the parties
to a pending dispute should not take steps that might aggravate it or prejudice
the execution of the award.*8 In Perenco v. Ecuador, the tribunal held that

[i]rrespective of the precise terminology used, the Tribunal’s efforts to
effectuate its mandate under a treaty by prevailing on the parties
to maintain the status quo in the case before it are binding on the par-
ties pursuant to their obligations under said treaty. [...]. In becoming a
Party to a treaty such as the Ics1D Convention |...], a State confers upon
an arbitral tribunal jurisdiction over certain claims and assumes an obli-
gation to take whatever steps might be necessary to comply with deci-
sions rendered by the tribunal pursuant to the treaty. So long as and to
the extent that the arbitration is in progress, both parties are under an
international obligation to comply with whatever the tribunal issues as
provisional measures for the purpose of protecting its jurisdiction and its
ability, should it so decide, to grant the relief requested. State Parties to
the IcsID Convention thus inherently are under an international obliga-
tion to comply with provisional measures issued by an IcsI1D tribunal.39

A stream of decisions confirming the mandatory character of provisional mea-
sures has followed this line of reasoning.*° Tribunals refrained from under-

37. Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. Ecuador, note 33, para. 69 in fine. In the same vein, see also City
Oriente Limited v. Ecuador, supra note 33, para. 393; Quiborax v. Bolivia, supra note 33,
Provisional Measures, para. 108.

38 Para. 24.

39 ~~ -Perenco v. Ecuador, supra note 33, paras. 66 and 67. In the same vein, in Burlington v.
Ecuador, supra note 33, para. 66, the tribunal held that “by ratifying the 1cs1D Convention,
Ecuador has accepted that an 1cs1D tribunal may order measures on a provisional basis,
even in a situation which may entail some interference with sovereign powers and
enforcement duties”.

40 ~~ See the decision referred to in note 33. It must nonetheless be noted that some tribunals
have referred only to their authority to recommend provisional measures under Article
47, ICSID Convention; see, for instance, Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. Czech Republic, 1cS1D Case
No. ARB/o06/5, Provisional Measures, 6 April 2007, paras. 29-30; Railroad Development
Corporation v. Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/o7/23, Provisional Measures, 15 October
2008, para. 31; Hydro S.r.l. and others v. Albania, 1csID Case No. ARB/15/28, Provisional
Measures, 3 March 2016, paras. 3.7, 3.12, 3.41 and 5.1.

LAPE 16 (2017) 159-184 Downloaded from Brill.com06/06/201 9 05:28:31 AM

via Leiden University
174 GAZZINI AND KOLB

taking any detailed analysis of the relevant provisions and simply conformed
themselves to what they considered as the consolidated jurisprudence on this
point, normally accompanied with reference to a couple of prior decisions.

The following sequence of decisions clearly illustrates how tribunals have
built up the jurisprudence on this point. In Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, the tribu-
nal confined itself to point out that “according to a well-established principle
laid down by the jurisprudence of the Ics1D tribunals, provisional measures
‘recommended’ by an IcsID tribunal are legally compulsory; they are in effect
‘ordered’ by the tribunal, and the parties are under a legal obligation to comply
with them”.#!

Four years later, another tribunal held that “although Article 47 of the 1cs1D
Convention uses the word ‘recommend; the Tribunal is, in fact, empowered to
order provisional measures. This has been recognized by numerous interna-
tional tribunals, among them the Ics1D tribunal in the Tokios Tokelés case”.
Another eight years passed and in PNG v. Papua New Guinea the tribunal
reiterated the power of IcsID tribunals to order — instead of recommend —
provisional measures.*? It refrained from elaborating any legal argument to
support this conclusion and laconically relied on a single decision, Occidental
v. Ecuador, which in turn made a reference to “numerous international tribu-
nals”, but expressly indicates only the tribunal appointed in Tokios Tokeleés v.
Ukraine.**

The view that IcsID tribunals may order provisional measures under Article
47 has found limited opposition. In Caratube v. Kazakhstan, the tribunal held,
without any explanation, that “according to Rule 39, the Tribunal cannot order,
but can only recommend provisional measures in ICSID proceedings”.*> In
a more recent case, a dissenting arbitrator argued that the text of Article 47
of the Ics1D Convention and Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules is unequivocal

41 Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, supra note 33, para. 4.

42 Occidental v. Ecuador, supra note 33, para. 58.

43 PNG v. Papua New Guinea, IcsID Case No. ARB/13/33, supra note 33, para. 102. In RSM
v. Saint Lucia, supra note 33, para. 48, the tribunal held that “[t]here is no question, in
general, that the Tribunal has the authority to order provisional measures to preserve
a Party’s right”. Regrettably, it failed to indicate any legal argument — either directly or
through prior decisions — to support the finding.

44 Similarly, in United Utilities v. Estonia, supra note 33, para. 109, the tribunal considered
that “it has the authority to order, not merely to ‘recommend, provisional measures.
This has been recognised by many IcsID tribunals, as stated in Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine”
(emphasis added).

45 Caratube International Oil Company LLP v. Kazakhstan, tcstD Case No. ARB/08/12,
Provisional Measures, 31 July 2009, para. 67.

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 175

in providing that an IcsID tribunal may recommend - as opposed to order —
provisional measures. In his words, “no matter how many times it is repeated,
an order is not a recommendation. Only in the jurisprudence of an imaginary
Wonderland would this make sense”.*® He further fortified the literal interpre-
tation with a double a contrario argument. On the one hand, he argued that had
the contracting parties to the IcsID Convention intended to confer on ICSID
tribunals the power to order provisional measures they would have drafted
Article 47 differently and articulated some standards or guidance for grant-
ing these measures. On the other hand, he emphasised that, unlike Article 47
of the 1cs1D Convention, the corresponding article in the Additional Facility
Rules — Article 46 — contains a reference to the provisional measures “ordered”
by the tribunal.*” Additionally, the legally binding nature of provisional mea-
sures has been occasionally challenged — without success — by States.*®

Apart from this rather isolated criticism, IcsID tribunals’ decisions on pro-
visional measures resemble a litany combining, on the one hand, the admis-
sion that the ordinary meaning, the context and the travaux préparatoires of
Article 47 of the 1cs1D Convention militate against the power to order such
measures, and, on the other hand, the decisive findings based on the Spanish
text of Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules as well as on the I1cJ jurisprudence that
provisional measures need to be mandatory in order to fulfil their function,
namely to preserve effectively the rights of the parties. The award in Quiborax
v. Bolivia, dealing, inter alia, with the order issued by the tribunal to the re-
spondent to take as a matter of provisional measures all appropriate measures
to suspend certain criminal proceedings directly related to the arbitration,*®
conveniently states the point. In the tribunal’s words,

[i]t is true that the ordinary meaning of this provision, especially the
terms ‘recommend’ and ‘should be taken’ do not convey the notion of a
binding order. The same can be said for the context; other provisions of
the IcsID Convention use different language when referring to binding

46 __ E. Nottingham, dissenting opinion in RSM Production v. Saint Lucia, supra note 33,
para. 16.

47 Ibid., para. 4.

48 See, for instance, the position of the respondent in Quiborax v. Bolivia, supra note 33,
Award, para. 574 (a).

49 On decisions by investment tribunals related to the continuation of domestic proceed-
ings and the related level of deference, see D. Kalderimis, “The Authority of Investment
Treaty Tribunals to Issue Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings’, 31 [CSID
Review (2016), 549, esp. 562-563.

LAPE 16 (2017) 159-184 Downloaded from Brill.com06/06/201 9 05:28:31 AM

via Leiden University
176 GAZZINI AND KOLB

obligations. Similarly, the travaux préparatoires of the IcS1D Convention,
to the extent relevant as supplementary means of interpretation, show
that an earlier draft using the word ‘prescribe’ was then changed to ‘rec-
ommend’. Despite this, 1cs1p tribunals have consistently found that
they have the power to make binding orders for provisional measures.
The rationale is that these decisions derive their mandatory force from
the function of provisional remedies, which is to secure the applicant's
rights while the proceedings are pending. To use the words of the Icj in
LaGrand, ‘the power in question is based on the necessity, when the cir-
cumstances call for it, to safeguard, and to avoid prejudice to, the rights of
the parties as determined by the final judgment of the Court’. While the
wording and the context of Article 41 of the cj Statute are not strictly
identical to those of the IcsID Convention (‘indicate’ instead of ‘recom-
mend’), the function of the measures is the same.5°

The tribunal also held that failure to adopt the provisional measures ordered
under Article 47 amounts to a breach of such provision, but does not neces-
sarily entail a violation of the duty to arbitrate in good faith.*! It did not attach
any specific consequences to non-compliance with provisional measures. It
is generally accepted that 1cs1D tribunals may take the attitude of the parties
regarding provisional measures into account when dealing with the merits of
the dispute.

VI Analysis of Legal Argument in Favour of the Mandatory Character
of Provisional Measures according to the Applicable Legal
Provisions

It is submitted that the finding that Ics1pD tribunals have the power not only
to recommend but also to impose provisional measures is not persuasive as
a matter of treaty interpretation. In the first place, the focus and insistence

50 Quiborax v. Bolivia, supra note 33, Award, paras. 578-579. On preparatory work, see infra
text note 57.

51 ‘The tribunal felt the need to clarify in footnote 743 that “provisional measures issued
under Article 47 are binding per se, a failure to comply with them will automatically entail
a breach of Article 47. This does not necessarily give rise to a breach of the underlying
right that the measures seek to preserve; whether those rights are harmed will depend on
the facts of the case”. The tribunal eventually found no breaches of the duty of good faith
regarding the procedural conduct in the arbitration, paras. 594-596.

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 177

on Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules rather than on Article 47 of the IcsID
Convention is unfortunate as the former are meant to implement the latter
and be “subject to the Convention’.*? As a result, the interpreter must consider
first and foremost Article 47 of the 1cs1D Convention. The Arbitration Rules
could be used, when appropriate, to confirm, clarify or determine the meaning
attached to Article 47 of the IcsID Convention.

It follows that tribunals are expected to concentrate on Article 47 of the
ICSID Convention and to meticulously interpret it in accordance with Articles
31 to 33 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (vcLT), keeping in
mind that “the text of the treaty is deemed to be the authentic expression of
the intentions of the parties; and its elucidation, rather than wide-ranging
searches for the supposed intentions of the parties, is the proper object of
interpretation.”>?

The ordinary meaning of Article 47 of the Ics1D Convention is straight-
forward. All three of the authentic versions of the treaty refer to the power
of ICSID tribunals to recommend provisional measures. The verb “to recom-
mend” has an unambiguous meaning, which is definitely distinct from that of
the verb “to order”. In using it in Article 47, the contracting parties to a treaty
made a deliberate choice for the purpose of defining the powers of the tribu-
nals and the related obligations of the parties to the dispute.

That IcstID tribunals have received the power to recommend, but not to
order, provisional measures is fully consistent with the object and purpose of
both the treaty as a whole and Article 47 of the Ics1D Convention. It cannot
be postulated that these objects and purposes, namely ensuring a stable legal
framework and an adequate protection of foreign investment, imperatively
demand that Ics1D tribunals have the competence to order the adoption of
provisional measures.

Arbitration Rule 39 can certainly be taken into account as context for the
purpose of interpreting Article 47 of the Ics1D Convention in accordance with
Article 31 (2) of the vcLT. Being meant to implement Article 47, however, Rule
39 cannot dislodge its clear literal meaning. Even assuming, for the sake of ar-
gument, that the meaning of Article 47 is not entirely clear, it must be empha-
sized that Rule 39 does not point unambiguously to the mandatory character
of provisional measures. In all three authentic texts, Rule 39 allows the parties

52  C.Schreuer with L. Malintoppi, A. Reinisch, A. Sinclair, supra note 3, 683.

53  Methanex Corp. v. United States, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Final Award, 3 August 2005, Part II,
Chapter B, para. 22. Accordingly, as pointed out in Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona
S.A. v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Jurisdiction, 16 May 2006, para. 54, “[t]he
starting place for any exercise in interpretation is therefore the treaty text itself”.

LAPE 16 (2017) 159-184 Downloaded from Brill.com06/06/201 9 05:28:31 AM

via Leiden University
178 GAZZINI AND KOLB

to the dispute to request a Tribunal to recommend the adoption of provisional
measures to preserve their rights. And only the Spanish text makes a reference
to “la dictacién” of provisional measures, which alludes to their mandatory
character.** The use of the term dictacion in the Spanish version is the only ele-
ment in Rule 39 militating in favour of the mandatory character of provisional
measures. However, such an element almost pales in significance compared
with the clear and coherent use of the verb “to recommend?” in all authentic
versions of Article 47 of the IcsID Convention as well as Arbitration Rule 39.

From the standpoint of Article 33 of the vcLT, furthermore, it must be
pointed out that the interpreter is not supposed to select one or several lan-
guages, but rather to extract from the treaty “the best reconciliation of the
differences”.*> Elevating the term dictacidn used in just one version of Rule 39
to the crucial element for the interpretation of Rule 39 is questionable, espe-
cially when considering the rest of the Spanish version as well as the English
and French versions, which unmistakably reveal the recommendatory nature
of provisional measures. This conclusion is further strengthened by the clear
indication contained in the Spanish version of note B to Arbitration Rule 39,
published by IcsID in 1968, that “a menos que las partes convengan lo con-
trario, el Tribunal sélo tiene la facultad de ‘hacer recomendaciones’”.°®

Should any doubts remain, they should be dissipated by the travaux prépara-
toires. The question of the nature of provisional measures was raised during
the negotiations and the proposal to confer on tribunals to order their adop-
tion was defeated. The verb “to prescribe” that appeared in a previous draft of
what would become Article 47 of the Ics1D Convention was eventually sup-
planted by the verb “to recommend’, thus demonstrating the reluctance of the
contracting parties to confer on ICSID tribunals the power to order provisional
measures.>”

54 In City Oriente Ltd v. Ecuador, supra note 33, para. 52, for instance, the tribunal found that
the distinction between recommending and ordering “is more apparent than it is real,
since Rule 39 (1) itself does, in its Spanish version, mention the ‘dictacidn’ [ordering] of
the provisional measures, which demonstrates that, as far as the Rules are concerned,
such words are used interchangeably”.

55 R. Gardiner, Treaty Interpretation (2nd ed., 2015), 380.

56 Reglas procesuales aplicables a los procedimientos de arbitraje, Regla 39, Notas B, p. 105,
https://icsid-worldbank.org/apps/ICSIDWEB/resources/Documents/ICSID%20
Regulations%2o0and%2o0Rules%201968%20-%20ENG.pdf.

57. See, in particular, Summary Proceedings of the Legal Committee Meeting, 8 December
1964, in A. Broches, History of the ICSID Convention, Vol. 11, 812-815. See also Quiborax
v. Bolivia, supra note 33, Award, para. 578. On the legislative history of Article 47, see
C.N. Brower, R.E.M. Goodman, “Provisional Measures and the Protection of ICSID

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 179

With regard to the LaGrand decision, there is no doubt that IcsID tribunals
are allowed — and indeed must be encouraged*® — to look at the legal argu-
ments developed by the Icj as a source of inspiration to interpret investment-
related treaties and to settle investment disputes. Yet, they must make sure
that such arguments are susceptible to being extended to investment disputes,
a question that largely depends on the text and content of the relevant legal in-
struments, which in the case under discussion are Article 41 of the 1cj Statute,
Article 47 of the IcsID Convention and Rule 39 of the Ics1D Arbitration Rules.

In the decisions sketched out above, IcsID tribunals conceded the sig-
nificant textual differences between Article 47 of the IcsID Convention and
Article 41 of the 1cj Statute. They nonetheless largely overlooked them
and did not see any obstacle to transposing in an almost mechanical fashion
to the former the interpretation of the latter adopted by the 1cj. They passively
borrowed the legal argument elaborated in LaGrand without inquiring as to
the difference between Article 41 of the cj Statute and Article 47 of the IcsID
Convention. The former consistently and in all authentic languages uses the
verb “to recommend”, whereas the latter employs, in the English, Spanish and
French texts, the verb “to indicate”. The importance of the difference must not
be underestimated since the use of “to recommend” in Article 47 of the IcsID
Convention results from a deliberate choice made by the contracting parties,
which were well aware of the text of Article 41 of the cj Statute. Leaving aside
its persuasiveness,°? the legal argument underpinning the LaGrand decision
can find limited application in relation to Article 47 of the Ics1D Convention.

Two final related considerations — both having a distinct teleological
flavour — deserve to be mentioned. The first concerns the well-established
principle that the parties to a dispute must refrain from taking measures sus-
ceptible to aggravate the dispute or hamper the execution of the award.®° The
principle alone does not postulate the power of an arbitral tribunal to order
mandatory provisional measures. Otherwise, the entire debate on the horta-
tory or mandatory character of provisional measures that opposed leading

Jurisdictional Exclusivity against Municipal Proceedings’, 6 JCSID Review (1991), 431, esp.
440 ff; A.R. Parra, The History of ICSID (2012), esp. 173 ff.

58 A. Pellet, “The Case Law of the ICJ in Investment Arbitration’, 28 [CSID Review (2013), 223.

59 See Section III.

60 —_ See, for instance, Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Indonesia, 1CS1D Case No. ARB/81/1,
Provisional Measures, 9 December 1983, 1 [CSID Reports (1993), 401, 411. In Caratube v.
Kazakhstan, supra note 45, para. 67, the tribunal held that “the Parties have an obligation
to conduct the procedure in good faith and that this obligation includes a duty to avoid
any unnecessary aggravation of the dispute and harassment of the other party”.

LAPE 16 (2017) 159-184 Downloaded from Brill.com06/06/201 9 05:28:31 AM

via Leiden University
180 GAZZINI AND KOLB

scholars for decades would not have made any sense. The existence of such
an obligation and the legal nature of a decision by a tribunal on provisional
measures are two different questions. The parties to a dispute must comply
with the obligations stemming from the principle independently from the
powers conferred on the tribunal or their exercise.®!

The second consideration relates to the consequences of disregarding a tri-
bunal’s recommendation on provisional measures. During the negotiation of
the IcsID Convention, a proposal that intended to introduce a sanction for
non-compliance with these measures was rejected.®* Instead, it was agreed
that IcsID tribunals would “take into account” such conduct.®? Some authors
have associated the fact that tribunals could take into account the reluctance
of any party to adopt the recommended measures with a “moral obligation” to
do so.* Be that as it may, the very fact that no sanction was attached to non-
compliance seems to confirm — or at least to be compatible with — the horta-
tory nature of such provisional measures.

VII Relevance of the Attitude of IcSID Members

If it is accepted that the interpretation upheld in the decisions sketched out
above is not persuasive, it is appropriate to inquire with regard to what the
consequences and implications may be.®* From this perspective, it must be
kept in mind that the parties to a treaty remain “the transaction’s exclusive and
absolute domini”®® and that international rules — including those contained in

61 ~~ ‘In Churchill Mining Plc and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Indonesia, 1cSID Case No. ARB/12/14
and 12/40, Provisional Measures, 4 March 2013, para. 57, the tribunal held that “[w]hile
the request for provisional measures must be denied, the Tribunal reminds the Parties
of their general duty, which arises from the principle of good faith, not to take any action
that may aggravate the dispute or affect the integrity of the arbitration”. See also text and
note 51.

62 See A.R. Parra, supra note 57, 86.

63. A. Broches, supra note 57, p. 815; A.R. Parra, supra note 57, 178.

64 G. Kaufmann-Kohler, A. Antonietti, supra note 31, 546.

65 Significantly, in Quiborax v. Bolivia, Award, supra note 33, paras. 582 and 583, the tribunal
conceded that the attribution of mandatory character to provisional measures can be
seen as an “evolution of international law” with regard not only to investment arbitration,
but also to the jurisprudence of the icy and the ECtHR. It even prospected the possibility
that the respondent “may not have been aware of the binding nature of these provisional
measures when it failed to comply with them”.

66 _ Expression borrowed from G. Arangio-Ruiz, The UN Declaration on Friendly Relations and
the System of the Sources of International Law (1979), 284-285, esp. note 183. In Canadian

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 181

international agreements — are created, modified and discarded through claims,
counterclaims, actions and reactions by the subjects of international law.®”

Given the significant number of coherent decisions upholding the manda-
tory character of provisional measures, it is not surprising that IcsID tribu-
nals have recently limited themselves to referring to these decisions and have
been reluctant to engage in a full discussion on the matter. Such an attitude is
likely to be consolidated in future decisions. True, each tribunal is not legally
bound by previous decisions.®* But it is also expected to consider and follow
established case law to the fullest possible extent, with a view to enhancing
the coherence and predictability of the whole system.®9 As pointed out by an
ICSID tribunal,

unless there are compelling reasons to the contrary, it ought to follow
solutions established in a series of consistent cases, comparable to the
case at hand, but subject of course to the specifics of a given treaty and of
the circumstances of the actual case. By doing so, it will meet its duty to
seek to contribute to the harmonious development of investment law and
thereby to meet the legitimate expectations of the community of States
and investors towards certainty of the rule of law.”

Yet, the crux of the matter remains the subsequent practice of the parties to the
ICSID Convention with a view to establishing the possible informal modifica-
tion of Article 47 in the sense of allowing IcsID tribunals to order provisional

Cattleman for Fair Trade v. United States (UNCITRAL) NAFTA, the respondent clearly
pointed out that “a treaty remains the exclusive province of the States parties themselves
that may construct the treaty either expressly or tacitly through subsequent conduct’,
Reply by the United States, 1 May 2007, p. 1. (emphases added, footnotes omitted), http://
wwwsstate.gov/documents/organization/84471.pdf.

67 See M.S. McDougal, “The Hydrogen Bomb Tests and the International Law of the Sea’, 49
American Journal of International Law (1955), 353-

68 See, among many decisions, AES Corp. v. Argentina, IcSID Case No. ARB/o2/17, Jurisdic-
tion, 26 April 2005, para. 30.

69 On this point, H. Lauterpacht, The Development of International Law by the International
Court (1958), p. 14, has eloquently pointed out that the 1cJ “follows its own decisions for
the same reasons for which all courts — whether bound by the doctrine of precedent or
not — do so, namely, because such decisions are a repository of legal experience to which
it is convenient to adhere; because they embody what the Court has considered in the
past to be good law; because respect for decisions given in the past makes for certainty
and stability, which are the essence of the orderly administration of justice [...]”.

70 ~~ -~-Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi AS v. Pakistan, 1CS1D Case No. ARB/03/29, Award,
27 August 2009, para. 145.

LAPE 16 (2017) 159-184 Downloaded from Brill.com06/06/201 9 05:28:31 AM

via Leiden University
182 GAZZINI AND KOLB

measures. Article 31 (3) (b) of the vcLT clearly directs the interpreter to take
into account any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty estab-
lishing the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation.”1 From this
perspective, the wTo Appellate Body has lucidly pointed out that this requires
“a ‘concordant, common and consistent’ sequence of acts or pronouncements
which is sufficient to establish a discernible pattern implying the agreement of
the parties [to a treaty] regarding its interpretation’.”

It therefore becomes crucial to assess the reaction or lack of reaction of the
parties to the IcsID Convention. In this regard, it must first be emphasized
that arbitral decisions cannot be treated as State practice.”* They remain the
pronouncements of arbitral tribunals that have been mandated by the parties
to settle a specific dispute between them. Strictly speaking, the effects of their
decisions are confined to the parties to the dispute. They may, nonetheless, in-
fluence State practice and trigger States’ reactions either in support or against
the interpretation taken by the tribunal. The lack of reaction to or the acqui-
escence in a consistent and significant body of decisions may amount to State
practice and demonstrate the general acceptance by the parties to the treaty of
the interpretation emerging from the arbitral decisions — even to the point
of informally modifying the treaty through subsequent practice.” Acceptance
by the disputing investor, on the contrary, is immaterial for the purpose of
State practice, as only the States parties are the masters of the treaty. What is
decisive is to establish whether State practice — rather than arbitral decisions —
is sufficiently concordant, common and consistent.”°

With regard to the mandatory character of provisional measures, it is con-
sequently the general acceptance of or acquiescence in arbitral tribunals’ de-
cisions by the parties to the 1cs1D Convention that may lead — or may have

71 ~~ See, for instance, Kasikili/Sedudu Island (Botswana/Namibia), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports
1999 (II), p. 1045, esp. paras. 49-50.

72 Japan — Measures Alcoholic Beverages, WT/DS8/AB/R, 4 October 1996, para. 106. See also
Canadian Cattlemen v. United States, supra note 66, para. 189.

73. In Romak S.A. v. Uzbekistan, UNCITRAL AA280, Award, 26 November 2009, para. 170, the
tribunal held that arbitral awards “cannot be deemed to constitute the expression of a
general consensus of the international community, and much less a formal source of
international law. Arbitral awards remain mere sources of inspiration, comfort or refer-
ence to arbitrators”.

74 +See R. Kolb, Bonne foi, supra note 7, 297 ff. See also W. Karl, Vertrag und spdtere Praxis im
Volkerrecht (1983).

75 See, with regard to the so-called 18-month requirement contained in some BITs con-
cluded by Argentina, Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentina, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/1,
Award, 15 August 2012, para. 268.

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN ICSID ARBITRATION 183

already led - to an informal modification of Article 47 of the icsip Convention.
From this perspective, the presence of two elernents must be shown. On the
one hand, a significant mumber of arbitral tribunals nvust have shared the inter-
pretation outlined above. On the other hand, the great majority of the parties
to the treaty, having had ample opportunity to react to the interpretation, must
have endorsed the new reading of the relevant provision or have refrained from
contesting its inaccuracy.

In the case of Article 47 of the 1csip Convention and Rule 39 of the 1csip
Arbitration Rules, both elernents seem to be satished. The decisions adopted
by the various arbitral triminais can be considered as having been sufficiently
coherent and as having reached the critical mass. They were rendered during
a time-span of about 16 years and there is Httle record of any negative reac-
tion by States, either of those appearing as respondents in proceedings or by
other States. Although the fact that not all investment awards are available to
the public calls for prudence, it may be conchided that a uniform and gener-
ally accepted practice has emerged allowing tcs1p tribunals to order binding
provisional measures. Indeed, had the parties to the Convention perceived the
decisions described above as an impairment of their rights or an alteration of
their obligations, they would have had a bona fide duty to oppose them.

VITL = Conchasions

A string of decisions rendered by rcs1p tribunals since 1999 have upheld —
virtually without opposition during the proceedings and amongst the parties
to the rcsip Convention - the mandatory character of provisional measures
under Article 47 of the 1cSID Convention and Rule 29 of the 1csim Arbitration
Rules. The legal arguments underpinning these decisions and principally the
Spanish version of Rule 39 as well as teleological considerations developed
along the lines of the 1cy decision in LaGrand are not entirely convincing.
Nonetheless, tribunals appear to consider these decisions as “jurisprudence
constante” and have confmed thernselves to refer to them without much elab-
oration and with an almost religious deference.

However, it is argued that these decisions imply a significant departure
from the meaning the contracting parties recorded in the treaty. Such a law-
making exercise does not suffice in itself to confer on an 1cstp tribunal the
competence nat only to recommend, but also to order, these measures. If the
overwhelming majority of 1csip members endorse, accept or at least acquies-
cence in these decisions, however, an informal modification of Article 47 may
be brought about. This is arguably what has happened in the last few years

LAPE 16 (2017) 159-184

184 GAZZINI AND KOLB

since these decisions have reached a critical mass and IcsID membership has
acquiesced in the power of ICsID tribunals to order provisional measures.

Attributing mandatory force to provisional measures can be deemed a
welcome development from the point of view of the efficiency of investment
arbitration and compliance with related awards. This is at once a chance anda
burden. It will also bring 1cs1D jurisprudence in line with that of other inter-
national tribunals and most prominently the Icj. It can additionally be seen
as another milestone in the rise of provisional measures to the legal Olympus
of binding legal acts. Here, as in other treaty matters, the attitude of States
parties is the decisive element. By remaining ostensibly silent, States may thus
have brought about a significant shift in the legal situation. Indeed, they are
the masters of the treaty, even when they remain silent. As Humpty Dumpty
reminds us, the real question is “which is to be master — that’s all.””6

76 ~—_-L. Carroll, Through the Looking Glass (1960), Chapter V1, 186.

pownids APH lS 2 OM BATHS 06-314

via Leiden University
