ICSID Review, Vol. 31, No. 3 (2016), pp. 549-575
doi: 10.1093/icsidreview/siw024

SPECIAL FOCUS ISSUE

The Authority of Investment Treaty
Tribunals to Issue Orders Restraining
Domestic Court Proceedings

Daniel Kalderimis?

Abstract—This article considers the authority of investment treaty tribunals to issue
provisional measures affecting domestic courts or, as they are more commonly known,
‘anti-suit injunctions’. In particular, the article examines provisional measures of the kind
ordered in the Chevron v Ecuador dispute, essentially to prevent the aggravation of an
alleged denial of justice. It is contended that there is something distinctive about
injunctive relief restraining another court or tribunal which is not necessarily captured by
applying the standard provisional measures formula. It is further contended that
measures restraining the continuation or enforcement of domestic court proceedings on
the basis of the non-aggravation principle raise special considerations of comity and a
concomitant need for care. The same considerations do not arise, at least not to the same
degree, with respect to measures which seek to restrain domestic court proceedings in
order to preserve the exclusivity or procedural integrity of investment treaty arbitration
proceedings. The article concludes that there is an important difference between
jurisdiction and authority. Investment treaty arbitration is one legal system amongst
many, and cannot afford to appear insensitive to the concerns of domestic legal orders.
That is so even where a serious breach of international law appears to be taking place.
Investment treaty arbitration tribunals should be wary of applying a generic provisional
measures test without first explaining and justifying a tailored anti-suit injunction analysis,
which sets a principled and appropriately high bar for intervention.

‘John Marshall has made his decision; now let him enforce it!? E Miles ‘After John
Marshall’s Decision: Worcester v Georgia and the Nullification Crisis’ (1973) 39 J South
Hist 519, 519.

I. INTRODUCTION

A. A Digression ...

The quotation above will be familiar to many. It is US President Andrew Jackson’s
apocryphal response* to the United States Supreme Court’s 1832 decision in

' Partner, Chapman Tripp, Wellington, New Zealand. Email: daniel.kalderimis@chapmantripp.com. The author
thanks Ollie Neas, solicitor at Chapman Tripp, for his research and editorial assistance. The responsibility for any
errors remains with the author alone.

2 It appears his actual response was equally dismissive but less epigrammatical: “The decision of the Supreme
Court has fell still born ... and they find that it cannot coerce Georgia to yield to its mandate.’ Paul F Boller and John
George, They Never Said It: A Book of False Quotes, Misquotes & False Attributions (OUP 1989) 53.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ICSID. All rights reserved.
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com

6LOZ eUNr gO UO Jesn AUedW0D adIAIaS spjaljJysas4 - seo.unosay UOHeUWOJU] Ag LGyP/EZ/6PS/E/L Ee AoeuIsqe-e|olUe/MalAaUpIsol/WOo dno‘siuuapeoek//:sdyy WOJJ pepeojuMog
BSO IGSID Rewew VOL. 34

Worcester v Georgia,’ in which the Court, led by Chief Justice Marshall, held that
Georgia state laws purporting to regulate Cherokee tribal lands were unconstitu-
tional because they violated federal treaties and laws. Both President Jackson and
(seorgia ignored the decision. Sammuecl Worcester, a missionary, was released from
imprisonment only through a pardon. The Cherokee Nation was relocated from
Georgia to Oklahoma along the Trail of Tears.*

The case, and its sad history, is a reminder that jurisdiction and authority are
not the same thing. It is one thing for a court to pronounce its decision and
another for that decision to be accepted and effective.? From an adjudicatory
perspective, jurisdiction concerns only the question of ‘can I’? Authority involves
considering also how the decision will be received, including whether it will be
viewed as legitimate and appropriate by relevant stakeholders. It requires asking
‘should P and, if so, “how should TP’?

B. Purpose of This Article

This article considers the authority of investment treaty tribunals to restrain domestic
court proceedings. In practical terms, this is a topic mostly concerned with interim
rather than final relief. Although the article will touch upon the powers of investment
treaty tribunals to issue non-pecuniary relief generally, it will focus—as has the case
law to date---on the authority of invesument treaty cribunals, and especially cribunals
under the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (CSID),
to issue provisional or interim measures affecting domestic courts.

The power of tribunals to issue provisional measures, including with respect to
domestic courts, has been admirably and recently surveyed in the literarure.° This
article does not rephcate those surveys. Instead, it examines provisional measures
of the kind ordered in the epic and extraordinary Chevron uv Ecuador dispute,
essentially to prevent the aggravation of an alleged denial of justice.’

The article secks to use the Chevron provisional measures case as a working
example from which to develop a theory of the appropriate limits of provisional
measures restraining domestic court proceedings. It is contended first that there is
something distinctive about injunctive relief restraining another court or tribunal

2 Worcester v Georgia 31 US (6 Pet) 515 832).
* Matthew Sundquist, ‘Wércesier v. Georgia: A Breakdown in the Separation of Powers’ (2610) 35 Am Indian LR
“ Viewed through a longer lens, it is also perhaps a reminder that authority can be gained, if not at first, then over
time. Nine months after the Worcester decision, when South Carolina asserted its power to nullify certain federal laws
without recourse to federal appeal, Jackson, although still a firm proponent of States’ rights, issued a proclamation
confirming the US Supreme Court’s ultimate power to decide constitutional questions. ‘Proclamation No 26
Respecting the Nullifying Laws of South Carolina’ (10 December 1832), crted in in A Century of Lawmaking for a New
Nation: U.S. Congressional Documents and Debates, 1774-1875, vol 4 (Government Printing Office 1904) 771,
© See eg Sam Luttrell ‘ICSD Provisional Measures “In The Round” (2015) 31 Arb Intl 394%; Dan Sarcoshi,
‘Provisional Measures and Investment Treaty Arbitration’ (2013) 29 Arb Intl 361; Caline Mouawad and Elizabeth
Subert, ‘A Cruide to Interim Measures in Investoar-State Arbitration’ (2013) 29(3) Arb Intl 381; Michael D
Goldhaber, “The Rise of Arbitral Power over Domestic Courts’ (2013) | SCL 374; Alan Tsang, “Transnational Rules
on interim Measures in International Courts and Arbirrations’ (2011) 14 Intl Arb LR 35; Zannis Mavrogordato and
Gabriel Sidere, “The Nature and Enforceability of ICSID Provisional Measures’ (2009) 75(1) Aroirration 38.
* Chevron Corporation (USA} and Texaco Petroleum Company v Republic of Ecuador, WMCITRAL, PCA Case No
44877 (commenced 21 December 2006).

FALL 2616 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 551

that is not necessarily captured by applying the standard provisional measures
formula. It is further contended that measures restraining the continuation or
enforcement of domestic court proceedings on the basis of the non-aggravation
principle raise special considerations of comity and a concomitant need for care.
The same considerations do not arise, at least not to the sarne degree, with respect
to measures that seek to restrain domestic court proceedings in order to preserve the
exclusivity or procedural integrity of the investment treaty arbitration proceedings.
Since there is something distinctive about injunctive relief that seeks to restrain
another court or tribunal, it seerms both more convernent and more accurate to
eschew the general language of provisional or interim measures for the specific
expression: ‘anti-suit injunction’ (ASD.° By ASI, this article contemplates any
order that sceks to restrain, directly or indirectly, temporarily or permanently, the
continuation or enforcement of proceedings of another tribunal or court.”

©. Structure of This Article

This article will first set out the background to the Chevron v Ecuador dispute,
before summarizing the use of ASIs in public international law generally and in
investment treaty arbitration jurisprudence specifically. Ik will then consider the
use of ASIs in transnational litigation, where the underlying policy considerations
are not dissimilar, although the context is different. It finally comes back to offer
some comments on the approach of the Chevron Tribunal to the difficult case
before it.

IL THE ASIis IN CHEVRON v ECUADOR

The origin, and subsequent twists and turns, of the Chevron v Ecuador dispute are
becoming increasingly familar to international lawyers, not least because they have
now been related at the outset of numerous court judgments around the world.
The summary that follows is deliberately brief and no doubt fails to do justice to
the complexity of the case and its various proceedings.

In 1964, Texaco Petroleum Company (TexPet), a subsidiary of Texaco
Incorporated, comamenced oil exploration and drilling in the Oriente region of
Eastern Ecuador and, the following year, started operating a petroleum concession
for a consortium. In 1974, PetroEcuador, a State-owned enterprise of Ecuador,
obtained a 25 percent share in the consortium. This stake increased over time. In
1990, TexPet ceased operating the consortium, and in 1992, TexPet rehnguished
all of its interests in the consortrnim and left Ecuador.

In 1993, Ecuadorian plaintiffs, representing some 30,000 inhabitants of the
Oriente region, filed a class action lawsuit against Texaco in the Southern District
of New York.'? In 1994, Peruvian plaintiffs, representing some 25,000 residents of
Peru, residing downstrearn from the Oriente region, filed a separate class action

® Gary Born uses the phrase ‘antisuit order’ to describe a ‘particularly delicate form of provisional measure’. Gary
Born, Imernational Commercial Arburation, vol % (2nd edn, Wolters Kluwer 2014) 2501.

Whatever its jursdictional basis, which could include Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States (opened for signature 18 March 1965, entered into force 14 October
1966) GCSID Convention) art 47 [and LCSD Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (April 2006) GCS
Arbitration Rules) r 39} or Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (1976)
CUNCITRAL Arbitration Rules) art 26. See generally, Thomas T Raphael, The Anu-Suit injunction (OUP 2068).

19 Acuinda v Texaco Inc, Dkt No 93 Civ 7527 (SDNY 3 November 1993).

=
aA
tA

ay
ay

ay
tay

era
SoM

Pe ee a ee re
COMA Gos SP

mr £4
stb PS
BS? IGSID Rewew VOL. 34

lawsuit against Texaco in the Southern District of New York.'! Both class actions
sought compensation on various legal theories for alleged contamination of water
supphes and the environment arising from TexPet’s operation of the drilling
activities,

In 1995, TexPet signed a settlement agreement with Ecuador, which it
contended released it from lability for environmental impact falling outside of
specttied projects (he 1995 Settlement), and it also sertled with local Ecuadorian
municipalities. In 1997, the United States and Ecuador signed a bilateral
invesument treaty (BIT).’* In 1998, Ecuador and PetroEcuador executed an
agreement releasing TexPet, its affiliates and principals from lability for environ-
mental impact in the former concession area (the 1998 Settlement}. In 1999,
Ecuador passed the Environmental Management Act CEMA), creating a private
right of action for individuals to seek damages for environmental damages in
Ecuador.'* In 2001, Chevron acquired Texaco.

In 2002, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals upheld judgments below
dismissing both the Ecuadorian and Peruvian class actions on forum non comveniens
grounds, finding that the courts of Ecuador provided an adequate alternative
forura for the claims and that the balance of private and public interest factors
weighed strongly in favour of trial by Ecuadorian courts.’* The order was made
subject to Texaco’s consent to the jurisdiction of the Ecuadorian courts.

In 2003, a class action lawsuit was filed, pursuant to the EMA, in the Superior
Court of Nueva Loia in Lago Agrio, Ecuador. Chevron objected to the Court’s
jurisdiction.

In 2006, Chevron and Texaco commenced a first BIT claim against Ecuador,'?
alleging failure to provide effective means of redress and denial of justice in
determining seven breach-of-contract claims with a combined alleged value of US
$533 milhon. The claims had allegedly lain dormant in Ecuador’s court system
since being filed between 1991 and 1993. On 31 August 2011, the first BIT
Tribunal found that Ecuador had failed to provide effective means of redress, thus
breaching Article I[(7) of the BIT, resulting in damages of US $78 million, plus
US $19 million in interest. '°

In fuly 2009, Ecuador notified its withdrawal from the ICSID Convention,
which took effect six months later.’ In September 20090, Chevron and Texaco
commenced a second BIT claim against Ecuador,'® alleging several breaches of
the BIT on account of the continuing Lago Agrio litigation, which it contended
was pursued with the collusion of the Ecuadorian State and US contingency-fee
lawyers. '°

1) Qa v Pace Inc, Dkt No 94 Civ 9266 (SDNY 28 December 1994).

12 Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic of Ecuador Concerning the Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investment (signed 27 August 1993, entered into force 11 May 1997) (US-EBecuador BIT).

13 Environmental Management Act Ley de Gesti6n Aribiental), Act No 99-37, Registro Oficial No 245 (30 July
1999),

- Aguinda v Texaco Inc, 303 F 3d 470 (2nd Cir 2602).

15 Chevron Corporation (n 7).

18 Chevron Corporation and Texace Petroleum Corporation u Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No 2009-
23, Final Award (31 August 2011).

17 See UNCTAD, FLA Issues Note No 2’ (9 December 2010) fa 2. ICSID Convention (n 9).

18 Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No 2006-
23, Claimants’ Notice of Arbitration (2% September 2009).

19 ibid para 3.

=
aA
tA

aoey
ny

ay
tay

7% 4
SoM

Keres tien
geen ees
sae cae er’

EOMUIOT GHAIOS

mya fy
stb PS
FALL 2616 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 553

A second BIT Tnbunal was constituted in Pebruary 2010, under the United
Nations Commussion on International Trade Law CONCITRAL) Arbitration Rules
(the Tribunal), Qn 14 May 2010, it issued its first Order on Interim Measures,
exhorting both parties to ‘maintain, as far as possible the status quo’ and not to ‘exert,
directly or indirectly, any unlawful influence or pressure on the [Lago Agrio] Cour’.*’

On 1 February 2011, Chevron filed a federal racketeering suit against the Lago
Agrio plaintiffs and their lawyers, alleging extortion with respect to the Lago Agric
proceeding.“! On 2 February 2011, the Tribunal was advised by the Superior
Court of Nueva Loja that the first instance judgment was uncertain but potentially
imminent. On 9 February 2011, the Tribunal issued a second Order for Interim
Measures, requiring Ecuador to: “‘[T}ake all measures at its disposal to suspend or
cause to be suspended the enforcement or recognition within and without Ecuador
of any judgment against the First Claimant in the Lago Agrio Case.*?

The Order was not reasoned but recorded in a short paragraph that:

fa}s to the grounds for the Claimants’ Second Application, the Tribunal concluded that
the Claimants have made out a sufficient case, to the Tribunal’s satisfaction, under
Arocle 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules, for the order made below in the discretionary
exercise of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to take Interim measures in respect of the subject-
matter of the Parties’ dispute.

On 7 March 2011, m the proceedings of Chevron v Donziger under the
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), Judge Kaplan of
the Federal District Court of the Southern District of New York granted an AST in
similar terms to those sought from the Tribunal in Chevron v Ecuador.’ The
judge’s analysis was extensive (127 pages long) and organized according to the
criteria for a standard injunction application rather than as an ASI.**

The first-instance Lago Agno pudgment was issued on 14 February 2011, in the sum
of US $8.6 billion in environmental damages and US $8.6 billion in punitive damages.

On 19 September 2011, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals vacated fudge
Kaplan’s order.°? On 26 January 2012, the Second Circuit Court issued its
reasons for doing so.*° Partly, it took the view that a global preliminary injunction
was not available to prevent enforcement when the relevant source of jurisdiction
was the New York Recognition Act.*’ But it also wrote extensively on ‘interna-
tional comity concerns’,?* which, it held, provided additional reasons to conclude

29 Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v Republic of Eeuador, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No 2009-
23, Order on Interim Measures (14 May 2010) 5.

21 Cheuron vu Donziger, No 11 Civ 0691 (LAK) (SDNY).

22 Chevron Corporation and Texaco Fetroleim Corporation v Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, PCA Case Ne 2009-
23, Order on Interim Measures (9 February 2011) 4.

° Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act 84 Stat 922-3.
* Chevron v Donsziger, 768 F Sepp 2d 581 (2011). See James E Berger and Charlene C Sun, ‘Recent
Developments: Chevron-Ecuader Dispute’ (March 2011) <https:/svww.paulhastings.com/docs/default-source/PDFs/
1870.pdf> accessed 12 June 2016, 3, noting thar “[t{he district courr’s analysis of Chevron’s motion for a preliminary
injunction was somewhat unorthodox. While Second Circuit law prescribes a specific multi-factor test that must be
satisfied for a party tc obtain a foreign anti-suit injunction Cwhich the injunction sought by Chevron clearly was), the
district court did not apply that test at the outset of its analysis. Instead, the court analysed the motion under the
standard test for preliminary injunctive relict’.

“3 Chevron v Naranjo, No 11-1150-evG), 2011 WL 4375022 (24 Cir 19 September 2011).

2° Chevron u Naranjo, 667 F 3d 232 (2012).

27 New York Civil Practice Law and Rules 5 5301.

8 ibid 242.

N
Ww

2

t

Bod IGSID Rewew VOL. 34

that the Recogmition Act could not support the broad injunctive remedy granted §
by the District Court: S

New York undertook to act a8 a responsible participant in an international system of
pustice-—-not fo set wp ifs Courts a8 a transnational arbiter to dictate to the entire world
which pidgments are entitled to respect and which countries’ courts are to be treated as
international pariahs .... to decline to enforce a judgment rendered in a foreign country
necessarily touches om international comity concerns. It is a particularly weighty rmmarter
for a court in one country to declare that another country’s legal system is s0 corrupt or
unfair that its judgments are entitled to no respect from the courts other nations ... when
a court im one country atternpts to preclude the courts of every other nation from ever
considering the effect of that foreign judgment, the comity concerns become far graver.

In such an instance, the court risks disrespecting the legal system not only of the country oS
in which the judgment was issued, but also those of other countries, who are inherently =
assumed insufficiently trustworthy to recognize what is asserted to be the extreme =
incapacity of the legal system from which the judgment emanates. The court presuming 8
to issue such an injunction sets iself up as the definitive imternational arbiter of the =
fairness and integrity of the world’s legal systems.”” s
The first instance Lago Agrio judgment was affirmed on appeal by the Provincial e
Court of Fustice of Sucumbios on 4 January 2012. The judgment was woheld save _
for punitive damages. The total amount was reduced to US $9.51 billion. =
On 25 January 2012, the Tribunal converted its second Order into a first ws
Interim Award on Interim Measures, again requiring Ecuador to ‘take all measures oS
at its disposal to suspend or cause to be suspended the enforcement or recognition Ss
within and without Ecuador of any judgment against the First Claimant in the S
Lago Agrio Case’.°’ On 16 February 2012, the Tribunal issued a second Interim =
Award on Interim Measures, ordering: =
G) the Respondent (whether by its pudicial, legislative or executive branches) to take all 3
measures necessary ta suspend or cause to be suspended the enforcement and =
recognition within and without Ecuador of the pudgments ... against the First *
Claimant i the Ecuadorian legal proceedings known as ‘the Lago Agrio Case’; RS

Gi) im particular, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such measures to
preclude any certification by the Respondent that would cause the said judgments to ©

be enforceable against the First Claimant; and

Git) the Respondent’s Government te continue to inform this Trrbunal, by the
Respondent’s legal representatives in these arbitration proceedings, of all measures
which the Respondent bas taken for the implernentation of its legal obligations under

the Second Interim Award.” i

On 27 Pebruary 2012, the Tribunal rendered its third Interim Award on 2
Jurisdiction and Admissibility? dismissing all objections and declaring its =
” ibid 242-5. a
2° Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No 2009- ®
23, First Interim Award on Interim Measures (25 January 20123 16. 2
2) Chevron Corporation and ‘Texaco Petroleum Corporation ¢ Republic of Ecuador, UNCITBAL, PCA Case No 2000- os
23, Second fnterim Award on Interim Measures (16 February 2012) 3. &
22 Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Carporation v Republic of Ecuador, IINCITRAL, PCA Case Me 200- <
23, ‘Third Interim Award on furisdiction and Admissibility (27 February 2012). =
FALL 2016 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 555

Jurisdiction to proceed to the merits phase. On 11 March 2012, fan Paulsson
rendered an opinion at the request of counsel for Chevron, opining that the Lago
Agrio proceedings amounted to a denial of justice under public international law.”’

On 7 February 2013, the Tribunal issued a fourth Interim Award on Interim
Measures.°? The Tribunal recorded that, in violation of its previous orders, the
Lago Agrio judgment was made final, enforceable and subject to execution within
Ecuador by the Respondent no later than 3 August 2012 upon its judiciary
certifying the Lago Agric judgment’s enforceability" The Tribunal further
recorded that it is ‘the only tribunal with the power to restrain the Respondent
generally from aggravating the Parties’ dispute and causing irreparable harm to the
Claimants in regard to the enforcermnent and execution of the Lagoa Agrio
Judgement’ and that the Respondent should ‘show cause to this Tribunal why the
Respondent should not now compensate the First Claimant for any harm caused
by the violation [of the Tribunal’s prior orders]?’.°° The Tribunal noted the massive
sum at stake as well as the risks that the fruits of enforcement would be diverted to
‘foreign funding and other financial institutions’ rather than to the Lago Agrio
plaintiffs.” It followed that it was ‘difficult now to exaggerate the risks facing the
First Claimant’ and noted the ‘increasingly grave risks that enforcement and
execution ... will imperil to a very significant extent the overall fairness and
efficacy of these arbitration proceedings’.”°

The Tribunal issued its first partial Award on 17 September 2013,°° finding that
both Chevron and TexPet are “Releasces’ under the 1995 and 1998 Settlements
but that the scope of releases in those settlements ‘does not extend to any
environmental claim made by an individual for personal harm in respect of that
individual’s rights separate and different from the Respondent’.*” On 12 March
2015, it issued a decision on Track 1B, where it found that the Lago Agrio
complaint included individual claims resting upon individual mghts under
Ecuadorian law, not falling within the scope of the 1995 Settlement, and that it
was accordingly not wholly barred at its inception by res judicata.*’ No final award
has been issued, and it appears that the proceedings continue.

On 4 March 2013, Judge Kaplan issued judgment in the RICO case.** The
judgment is extraordinary. The judge found that Steven Donziger, the New York
lawyer who led the Lago Agrio class action, and the Lago Agrio plaintiffs,
‘corrupted’ the proceedings by submutting fraudulent evidence, coercing and
bribing judges and writing the Lago Agrio judgment themselves.*° The judgment

23 Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation u Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No 2009-
23, Opinion of Jan Paulsson (12 March 2012) para &2.

24 Chevron Corporation and ‘Texaco Petrolewm Carporation v Republic of Ecuador, IINCITRAL, PCA Case No 2009-
23, Bourth Interim Award cn Interum Measures (7 February 2013}.

* ibid para 79.

36 jhid paras 61-2.
* ibid para 84.

28 ibid paras 85-6.

°° Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v Republic of Keuador, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No 2009-
23, Birst Partial Award on Track 1 (7 September 2613).

ibid 45.

“Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v Republic of Ecuador, INCITRAL, PCA Case Mo 2009-
23, Decision on Track 1B (12 March 2015) 59,

*® Chevron « Donziger, Case {1b 1-cv-00691-LAK-ICK, Opinion (4 March 2014.

35 ibid 1-2. Since the time of writing this article, Judge Kaplan’s decision, including his findings as to the
Fouadorian judgment being obtained by fraud, has been upheld by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals: Chevron
Corporation v Dongiger, No 14-0826(L), 2016 WL 4173988 (2d Cir 8 August 2016). Also upheld was a permanent

injunction contained in Judge Kaplan’s decision which -- less expansively than the glcbal preliminary injunction

we

=
aA
tA

aoey
ny

ay
tay

7% 4
SoM

Keres tien
geen ees
sae cae er’

EOMUIOT GHAIOS

mya fy
stb PS
556 ICSID Review VOL. 31

is also extremely lengthy. It bears reading in full, but it will suffice to quote from
the conclusion:

The saga of the Lago Agrio case is sad. It is distressing that the course of justice was
perverted. The [Lago Agrio plaintiffs] received the zealous representation they wanted,
but it is sad that it was not always characterised by honor and honesty as well. It is
troubling that, in the words of Jeffrey Shinder, what happened here means that ‘we’ll
never know whether or not there was a case to be made against Chevron’. But we have
come full circle. ... The issue here ... is whether a court decision was procured by
corrupt means, regardless of whether the cause was just. The decision in the Lago Agrio
case was obtained by corrupt means. The defendants here may not be allowed to benefit
from that in any way. The order entered today will prevent them from doing so.**

In the meantime, enforcement action has continued. On 4 September 2015, the
Supreme Court of Canada upheld a decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal
affirming its jurisdiction to enforce the Lago Agrio judgment against both Chevron
and its subsidiary Chevron Canada.*° This decision is without prejudice to further
defences and procedural motions available to the Chevron entities.*°

Finally, on 20 January 2016, the District Court of the Hague rejected Ecuador’s
attempt to set aside the Tribunal’s interim measures orders. The District Court
acknowledged that the Tribunal’s reasoning was ‘concise’.*’ However, it inferred
that the interim measures taken by the Tribunal:

cannot be explained otherwise than by the fact that at the time those measures were
taken, the Tribunal apparently had serious indications that the judgment rendered at first
instance in the Lago Agrio proceedings, which is the basis for (the suspended)
enforcement by the Lago Agrio claimants, came into being fraudulently—including on
the side of the Lago Agrio claimants—and under political pressure. ... This circumstance
automatically—even though the Tribunal did not explicate this in the Interim Awards—
provides justification for the possible (temporary) consequences for the Lago Agrio
claimants of the interim measures, even in the event that these measures. ... entail a
restriction of any mandatory right of the Lago Agrio claimants of a fundamental nature.*®

Ill. ASIs IN PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW

It is common for international courts and tribunals to have the power to order
provisional measures.*”? For the International Court of Justice (ICJ), the power to

ordered, but then overturned, in 2011 — enjoins the three United States-based defendants from seeking to enforce the
Ecuadorian judgment in the United States, but does not enjoin any party from seeking recognition or enforcement
elsewhere. See WL pages 51-53 and 62-64. The Tribunal has since admitted the Court of Appeals’ judgment as an
exhibit in the arbitral proceedings, noting that it is not binding on the Tribunal: Chevron Corporation and Texaco
Petroleum Corporation v Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No 2009-23, Procedural Order No 45 (29
August 2016) para 3.

ibid 484-5.

+5 Chevron Corp v Yaiguaje, 2015 SCC 42, [2015] 3 SCR 69, para 75, holding that there is no need to demonstrate
a real and substantial connection between the dispute and the enforcing forum.

4° ibid para 77.

47 Ecuador v Chevron, Case No C/09/477457/HA ZA, 14-1291, para 4.35.

48 ibid para 4.30.

4 See eg Shabtai Rosenne, Provisional Measures in International Law (OUP 2005) 6-8. Note especially United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (opened for signature 10 December 1982, entered into force 16 November
1994) art 290, in respect of all judicial bodies empowered to render binding decisions on the application of the
Convention, including the International Tribunal of the Law of the Sea and tribunals constituted under annexes VII
and VIII; Treaty of the European Economic Community (opened for signature 25 March 1957, entered into force 1

6LOZ eUNr gO UO Jesn AUedW0D adIAIaS spjaljJysas4 - seo.unosay UOHeUWOJU] Ag LGyP/EZ/6PS/E/L Ee AoeuIsqe-e|olUe/MalAaUpIsol/WOo dno‘siuuapeoek//:sdyy WOJJ pepeojuMog
FALL 2016 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 557

‘indicate’ provisional measures is conferred by Article 41 of the ICJ Statute.”° It is
now clear that, despite the weak verb, ICJ provisional measures orders are binding.”'

The ICJ’s jurisprudence for when provisional measures are appropriate is now
settled. The requesting party must establish four main factors. First, it must
establish that the Court has prima facie jurisdiction over the proceedings.”” In
practice, this means ‘little more than ... that it appears that the Court might or
could have jurisdiction over the merits and that the absence of that jurisdiction is
not manifest’.?? Second, it must establish that the rights asserted by the requesting
party are at least plausible.°* Third, it must establish that there is a link between
the provisional measures and the ultimate relief sought in the proceedings.’ This
is because provisional measures are a feature of the ICJ’s incidental jurisdiction
and cannot outstrip the scope of the main proceedings.”° Finally, it must establish
that irreparable prejudice could be caused to rights that are the subject of the
proceedings.®’ This implicitly requires a showing of ‘urgency, in the sense that
there is a real and imminent risk that irreparable prejudice will be caused to the
rights in dispute before the Court has given its final decision’.”®

Despite the increasing use and acceptance of its provisional measures powers,
the international court has only rarely ordered ASIs. Perhaps the closest relevant
example comes from the decision of the Permanent Court of International Justice
(PCIJ) in 1939 to enjoin pending debt collection court proceedings in Bulgaria.””
Belgium claimed that these proceedings, as well as various executive and legislative
acts, had distorted the application of a coal price tariff formula previously ordered
by a mixed tribunal in the 1920s. Belgium sought reparation. The PCI] indicated
that Bulgaria ‘should ensure that no step of any kind is taken capable of
prejudicing the rights claimed by the Belgian Government or aggravating or

extending the dispute submitted to the Court’.

January 1958) art 203 (formerly 186), with respect to the European Court of Justice; Rule 39 of the Rules of Court of
the European Court of Human Rights (entered into force 1 January 2016), with respect to the European Court of
Human Rights; American Convention on Human Rights (opened for signature 21 November 1969, entered into force
18 July 1978) art 63(2), with respect to the American Court of Human Rights.

°° Statute of the International Court of Justice (opened for signature 26 July 1945, entered into force 24 October
1945).

>! See LaGrand (Germany v United States of America), Provisional Measures, Order [1999] IC] Rep 9, discussed
below and President Shi addressing the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly, Doc A/58/PV.50 (31 October
2003) 4: ‘I would like to stress that both Judgments and orders indicating provisional measures made by the Court are
binding on the parties ... . The binding effect of orders indicating provisional measures under art 41 of the Statute of
the Court has recently been confirmed by the Judgment rendered by the Court in the LaGrand case’. See also, in the
human rights context, Mamatkulov and Askaraov v Turkey, App nos 46827/99 and 46951/99 (ECtHR, 4 February
2005).

>2 See eg Case Concerning Legality of Use of Force (Yugoslavia v Canada), Provisional Measures [1999] ICJ Rep 916,
923; Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2000) (Democratic Republic of the Congo v Rwanda),
Provisional Measures [2002] ICJ Rep 219, paras 57-8.

°3 Rosenne (n 49) 121-2.

>4 See eg Construction of a Road in Costa Rica along the San Juan River (Nicaragua v Costa Rica), Provisional
Measures [2013] ICJ Rep 398, para 15.

>> See eg ibid 398, para 16.

°° See eg Rosenne (n 49) 9; Land, Island and Maritime Frontier Dispute (El SalvadorlHonduras: Nicaragua
intervening), Application to Intervene Judgment [1990] ICJ Rep 92, para 98.

>? See eg Request for Interpretation of the Judgment of 15 June 1962 in the Case Concerning the Temple of Preah Vihear
(Cambodia v Thailand), Provisional Measures [2011] IC] Rep 537, para 46.

°8 See eg Construction of a Road (n 54) 398, para 25.

°° In re Electricity Co of Sofia and Bulgaria (Belgium v Bulgaria) (Interim Measures Decision) PCIJ Rep Series A/B
No 79 (Electricity Company). On the eve of the Second World War, which resulted in both the agent for, and the judge
nominated by, the Bulgarian government being unable to attend the hearing.

°° ibid 199.

6LOZ eUNr gO UO Jesn AUedW0D adIAIaS spjaljJysas4 - seo.unosay UOHeUWOJU] Ag LGyP/EZ/6PS/E/L Ee AoeuIsqe-e|olUe/MalAaUpIsol/WOo dno‘siuuapeoek//:sdyy WOJJ pepeojuMog
BSR IGSID Rewew VOL. 34

More recently, the IC] in three cases—Case Concerning the Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations (Paraguay v United States of America),°’ LaGrand (Germany v
United Srates)°” and Avena (Mexico v United States)°*—indicated provisional
micasures to prevent the execution of convicted prisoners in the USA on the basis
of claims from Paraguay, Germany and Mexico, respectively, that the prisoners
had been deprived of their international law rights to consular assistance.°*

In Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, the IC] indicated provisional
measures, but these were not given effect by the Governor of Virginia. The
question of whether the measures were binding, however, was not pursued.

In LaGrand, the IC] indicated provisional measures requiring the DSA to “take all
measures at its disposaP to ensure that Walter LaGrand, a German nauonal
sentenced to death, was not executed pending the final decision of the IC]. The
ICPs decision was mot, in strict terms, an ASI since the Arona courts were no longer
involved im enforcing the sentence. However, it did seck to suspend the enforcement
of a judicially mandated criminal sentence. In doing so, it applied the same
provisional measures criteria as for other IC] decisions.°° Despite the ICF’s order,
Walter LaGrand was executed. In 2001, the IC] found that the USA, merely by
transmitting the order to the Governor of Arizona without any comment, had failed
to discharge its obligation to take all measures at its disposal to ensure that LaGrand
was not esecuted.°’ The Court thus confirmed that its provisional measures orders
are ‘binding in character’ and ‘not a mere exhortation’. It denied that, in making
such orders, it was purporting to sit as a court of final criminal appeal.°”

Simnlariy in ivena, the IC] ordered the USA in 2003 to take all measures
necessary to ensure that three named Mexican nationals were not executed
pending the IC]’s final judgment in the proceedings.’” The IC] subsequently
found the USA to have breached the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations
rights of 51 Mexican nationals.’’ While President George Bush declared that the
USA would “discharge its international obligations ... by having State courts give
effect to the [Avena] decision’,’* the US Supreme Court emphasized that the IC]
decision did not have effect domestically.”

°! Case Concerning the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations (Paraguay v United States of America) {1998} IC] Rep
248 (Provisional Messures), 326 (Discomtinuance),

© Lattrand (nm 51) 9.

83 Case Concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v United States), Provisional Measures, [2003] ICT
Rep 77.

“ Under Vienna Convention on Consular Relations (opened for signature 24 April 196%, entered into force 19
March 1967) (VCCR) art 36.

° Latrand (m 51) %, para 29.

8° “The gravamen of the decision was that irreparable harm—the loss of a human life—would result were the
execution ro rake place.

8 LaGrand Case (Germany v United States of America) Jadgment [2001] IC] Rep 466, 507-8.

8 ibid 505-6.

& jhid 485-6. See alsa LaGrand (n 31) 9, para 25.

7 Avena (a 63) 77.

Tl deena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v United States of America), Jadgrmnent, (2004) IC] Rep 12. VCCR tm 64).

“= The White House Memorandum for the Artorney General (28 February 2005) <http://www.deathpenaltyinfo.
org/node/799 > (accessed 13 June 2016).

3 Medellin v Texas, 5220S 491, 504 (2008). The case before the US Supreme Court concerned, in particular, a habeas
corpus petition fled im Texas by Jose Medellin, one of the 31 Mexican nationals, a month after the Bush memorandum.
The Supreme Court held that neither the Avena decision nor President Bush’s memorandum constituted directhy
enforceable federal law that pre-empts state limitations on the filing of successive habeas corpus petitions. Chief Justice
Roberts, giving the opinion of the Court, explained that, although the [C] decision was binding at international jaw, it did
not have its own direct effect domestically. Nor was the president empowered ro give directions to state courts: “Phe
President has an array of political and diplomatic means available to enforce international cbligations, but unilaterally
converting a non-self-executing treaty into a self-executing one is mot among them’ (525).

FALL 2016 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 559

Orders to protect the right to life and/or personal integrity of prisoners, aliens
subject to deportation and other individuals have been made in both the European
and American Courts of Human Rights.’* Compliance, however, remains
doubtful.’” Outside of the human rights contest, few other international tribunals
have sought to grant orders in the nature of ASIs.’°

‘Two observations are offered for present purposes. First, this case law concerns
provisional measures generally and not ASIs in particular. The overall provisional
measures test has mot yet been subject to explicit refinement where an ASI is in issue.
Second, the [IC] capital punishment cases ilhistrate the practical difficulties for an
international conurt seeking to suspend domestic processes. It is not surprising to min
into separation-of-power doctrines and the real nsks of non-compliance. The USA’s
response, especially in the LaGrand case, may have been partly characterized by a lack
of willingness to spend political capital secking to enforce an unwelcome intrusion
into its domestic affairs. Equally, however, there was and is no clear process for giving
effect to the decisions of international courts to intervene in domestic criminal rustice
processes. This reflects the fact that, in most countries, international and domestic
orders exist on distinct planes, and confusion tends to arise when they intersect.”

IV, ASIs IN UNCITRAL AND [ICSID ARBITRATIONS

A. General Observations

The interim and provisional measures tests under the UNCITRAL and ICSID regimes
are, following the 2010 amendments to the former, now rather differently expressed.
The 2010 amendments were intended to import into the UNCIPRAL Arbitration
Rules the 2606 amendments to the UNCITRAL Model Law to better articulate when
interim measures should be ordered. ’* The ICSID language, by contrast, although also
adjusted in 2006, remains non-prescriptive and general in character.

As a result of its 2010 amendments, the language of Article 26 of the
UNCIPRAL Arbitration Rules is reasonably instructive as to what is meant by
interim measures and when they can be ordered. Paragraph (2) confirms that they
are temporary measures that can be used, for example and without limitation, to
preserve assets or evidence or to:

(a} Maintain or restore the status quo pending determination of the dispute; or
(b) Take action that would prevent, or refrain from taking action that is likely to cause,
G) current or imminent harm or Gi) preyudice to the arbitral process itself.

™ See eg Clara B Herrera and Yves Haeck ‘Letting States Off the Hook? The Paradox of the Legal Consequences
Pollowing State Mon-Compkance with Provisional Measures in the Inter-American and European Human Rights
Systems’ (2010) 28(3) Nethl QHR 332, 333.

 ihicl 333.

7° One example is The ‘Enrica Lexie’ case, concerning a shooting aboard an Italian fishing ship operating off the coast of
Kerala, India. Vhe Internationa! Tribunal for the Law of the Sea issued a provisional measures order under art 296 of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea requiring both Italy and India to suspend (and refrain from starting
new) court proceedings which might aggravate their dispute, which was then pending before an Annex VIE tribunal. The
Fnrica Lexie’? Incident Ctaly v India), VTLOS Case No 24, Order for Provisional Measures (24 August 2015) 26.

77 See eg Campbell McLachlan, OC, "The Continuing Controversy over Provisional Measures in International
Dispures’ (26063) 7 lati 1. Borum de droit Ind 3, 14.

78 See United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Model Law (2006) ch IV A, as adopted by the
Commission at its thirty-ninth session in 2006. UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (n 9).

=
aA
tA

aoey
ny

ay
tay

7% 4
SoM

Keres tien
geen ees
sae cae er’

EOMUIOT GHAIOS

mya fy
stb PS
B60 IGSID Rewew VOL. 34

Paragraph (3) requires the requesting party for both such measures’ to satisfy
the tribunal that:

(a) Harm not adequately reparable by an award of darnages is likely to result if the measure
is not ordered, and that such harm substantially oupweighs the harrn that is likely to
result to the party against whom the measure is directed if the measure is granted; and

Co) There is a reasonable possibility that the requesting parties will succeed on the merits
of the clairn.

By contrast, the language in Article 47 of the ICSID Convention is short and
open—textured:

Except as the partes otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the

circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which should be taken to
‘ . . 30

preserve the respective rights of either party.

Article 47’s power is supplemented by Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
which were amended in 2006 to introduce a procedure for the expedited filing of
requests for provisional measures (and of all the observations of the parties to such
requests) prior to the constitution of an ICSID tribunal.“’ The substance of
Article 47, however, is unaltered by Arbitration Rule 39. Arbitration Rule 39(6),
introduced in 1984,°° states that nothing in it prevents the parties from requesting
any judicial or other authority to order provisional measures for the preservation of
their rights and interests, provided they have so stipulated in their agreement
expressing consent to TCSID arbitration. Thus, TCSID tribunals have exclusive
jurisdiction not only over the dispute itself but also over provisional measures
relating to it, unless the parties have otherwise agreed.™*

Even though the ‘circumstances-so-require’ language of Article 47 is broad,
ICSID tribunals have generally required a showing that the provisional measures
are both urgent and necessary to protect the rights of the parties in the case where
the final award is pending."* There remains debate over whether the necessity test
requires a showing of Srreparable harm’°" or something lesser, such as ‘significant

? And also measures needed to preserve assets but not necessarily measures needed ro preserve evidence. See ibid
art 26(4),

8° The description used by Paul Friedland, writing 30 years ago, was ‘ill-defined’. Paul Friedland, “Provisional
Measures and ICSID Arbitration’ (1986) 2 Arb Intl 335, 334.

8! See ICSUD Arbitration Rules (n 9) arts 39¢2, 39(5); Aurelia Antonietti, “Phe 2006 Amendments to the ICSID
Rules and Regulations and the Addirional Facility Rules’ (2006) 21(2) ICSID Rev-—-FIL]J 427, 438.

®2 Christoph H Schreuer and crhers, The ICSI Convention: A Conunentary (CUP 2009) 399.

83 Schreuer and others (n 82) 399-400. See eg Occidential Exploration & Production Co v Ecuador, [2005] EWCA
iv 116, para 42; ETT Telecom Internacional NV v Republic of Bolivia, Empresa Nacional de Télecemmunicaciones Entel
SA, [2008] EWCA Civ 880, para 108.

"4 See eg Sarooshi (n 6) 364-5; Larttrell (nm 6) 345-6, 397; Caline Mouawad and Elizabeth Silbert ‘A Guide to
Interim Measures ia Investor-State Arbitration’ (2013) 29(3) Arb [ntl 38h, 387.

85 See eg Occidental Petroleum Coporation and Gceidental Exploration and Production Company v Republic of Ecuador,
ICSID Case No ARB/06/11, Decision on Provisional Measures (17 August 2007) 40; Tokios Torelés vu Ukraine, LOSID
Case No ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No % (18 January 2005) para 8.

FALL 2016 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 561
harm’? or ‘substantial prejudice’.®’ Aside from these two elements, ICSID
tribunals have tended to endorse requirements to show prima facie jurisdiction, a
prima facie basis to the claim and proportionality.™®

The ‘nk’ test reqnnred by IC] jurisprudence-—-that there be a connection
between the provisional measures and ultimate relief sought-——-would seem equally
applicable to investment treaty arbitration, although it receives less attention. It is
implicit in the Article 26(2) examples provided in the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules as well as in the ‘circumstances-so-require’ language of Article 47. In
investment treaty arbitration as well as in IC} cases, provisional measures powers
exist as incidental powers to preserve the position pending a final decision. They
should not in principle be used to achieve collateral purposes beyond the
legitimate scope of the arbitration itself. This point was authoritatively made in
Plama v Bulgaria, where a reason for rejecting provisional measures restraining
insolvency proceedings was that the final relief sought in the arbitration was
damages, not any form of specific performance.°”

A final general point is the question of whether such orders are binding. The
expression used in Article 26(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules is ‘grant
interim measures’. This wording plainly conternplates a form of order binding on
the parties. By contrast, the phrase used in Article 47 of the ICSID Convention is
‘recommend any provisional measures’. This wording has engendered debate, akin
to that regarding Article 41 of the IC] Statute, as to whether KCSID tribunals may
order binding provisional measures.

Christoph Schreuer explains that ‘ithhe Convention’s legislative listory suggests
that a conscious decision was made not to grant the tribunal the power to order
binding provisional measures’.°° During debates, Aron Broches has observed that
there was ‘no way for a private investor to obtain [the] specific enforcement fof
provisional measures} against the State’, and some delegates have envisaged
difficulties where a provisional measure mught conflict with mumicipal law,
especially the constitutional law of the country where it should be carried out”!
Schreuer notes that these concerns were rernoved when the Tribunal’s power was
restricted to recommending provisional measures.”*

However, ICSID case law has now eroded, if not obliterated, the restriction
against ordering provisional measures.”’ ICSID tribunals now readily declare their
ability to do so.°* As Schreuer also observes, the cases in which domestic courts

® See eg City Oriente Limited v Republic af Eeuader and Empresa Estaral Pewéleos del Ecuador (Petroecaador), ICSID
Case Mo ARB/06/21, Decision on Revocarion of Provisional Measures and Other Procedural Matrers (13 May 2008)
para 72; Burlington Resources, Inc vu Republic of Eciador, [OSUD Case No ARB/08/5, Procedural Order Mo 1 (29 Tune
2009), See also Biwater Gauff Clanzania) Limited ov United Republic of Tanzania, YOSID Case No ARB/O5/22,
Procedural Order No 1 (41 March 2006); Ferenco Ecuador Limited u Republic of Ecuador, (CSED Case No ARB/O8/6,
Decision on Provisional Measures (6 May 2009).

8’ See eg Sarooshi (who argues that it is more appropriate for ICSED tribunals to adopt the lower threshold of
‘significant harm or threat’ to the parties rights when deciding whether provisional measures are ‘necessary’ rather
than using the [C]’s higher threshold of ‘irreparable prejudice’) Sarooshi (1 6) 379; Luttrell (n 6) 344-5.

® Luttrell (n 6) 397.
8° Plama Consortium Limited v Republic of Bulgaria, {CSUD Case No ARB/03/24, Order (6 September 2005) paras 40—1.
90

Schreuer and cthers (n 82) 764.
"| ibid 766.
ibid.
Loattrell (n G) 345.

°* Emilio Agustin Moaffesini « Kingdom of Spain, 1CSUD Case Ne ARB/O7/7, Procedural Order No 2 (28 October
1999) para 9; Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation uv Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No ARB/98/2,
Decision on the Request for Provisional Measures (25 September 2001) para 22; Tokios Tokelés v Ukraine, {CSIP Case
No ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No 1 G1 fuly 2003) para 4: Perenco v Ecuador (n 86) para 74; Occidental v Ecuador

Ke]
wo oN

oO

562 ICSID Review VOL. 31

have played a role in the context of ICSID provisional measures have concerned
not the enforcement of provisional measures by domestic courts but, rather, the
making of ASIs against action taken in domestic courts.”°

B. Three Main Categories of Investment Treaty Arbitration ASIs

The investment treaty arbitration ASI case law has tended to fall into three main
categories. The first is where, based upon the Article 26 exclusive remedy rule,
ICSID tribunals have issued ASIs prohibiting the continuation of competing
domestic proceedings or non-ICSID arbitrations. Cases of this type include: CSOB
v Slovak Republic,’° Zhinvalt v Georgia,’ SGS v Pakistan,’® Tokios Tokelés v Ukraine’?
and Millicom v Senegal.'°° In Plama v Bulgaria, however, the Tribunal scrutinized the
relevant domestic insolvency and tax proceedings and found that they did not affect
the issues involved in, or the outcome of, the ICSID arbitration.’°’ These cases have
no obvious counterpart in UNCITRAL arbitrations and have grown from under-
standing Article 26 as confirming the exclusive jurisdiction of ICSID arbitration over
competing domestic proceedings covering the same subject matter.

The second category is where tribunals have issued ASIs prohibiting the
continuation of ancillary proceedings—often criminal prosecutions—that materially
threaten the integrity of the ICSID proceeding. These have largely comprised
satellite proceedings directed at participants, including witnesses and lawyers, in the
investment treaty arbitration process. Even where the satellite proceedings have been
distracting or seemingly tenuous, the case law has confirmed a high bar to justify
interference with a State’s sovereign police powers.'°” Cases granting such an order

(n 85) para 58; City Oriente Limited v Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador),
ICSID Case No ARB/06/21, Decision on Provisional Measures (19 November 2007) para 92; Spyridon Roussalis v
Romania, ICSID Case No ARB/06/1, Decision on Provisional Measures (22 July 2008) para 21; United Utilities
(Tallinn) BV and Aktsiaselts Tallinna Vesi v Republic of Estonia, ICSID Case No ARB/14/24, Decision on Respondent’s
Application for Provisional Measures (12 May 2016) para 109.

°> Schreuer and others (n 82) 766.

°° Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, AS v Slovak Republic, I1CSID Case No ARB/97/4, Procedural Order No 4 (11
January 1999), where the Tribunal recommended that certain bankruptcy proceedings be suspended to the extent
they might involve determinations which overlapped with those arising in the ICSID proceeding.

°? Zhinvali Development Lid v Republic of Georgia, |CSUD Case No ARB/00/1, Award (24 January 2003), where the
Tribunal recommended that domestic Georgian courts cease considering a claim involving the same issues presented
to the ICSID Tribunal.

°8 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No ARB/01/13, Procedural
Order No 2 (16 October 2002), where the ICSID Tribunal recommended that a conflicting domestic arbitration in
Pakistan be stayed pending the Tribunal’s award on jurisdiction. The Procedural Order also addressed an anti-
arbitration ASI emanating from the Pakistan Supreme Court, which the SGS Tribunal determined was not binding on
it (as had the UNCITRAL Tribunal in Himpurna California Energy Ltd v Indonesia, UNCITRAL, Interim Award (26
September 1999) para 73, when faced with a similar anti-arbitration ASI).

°° Tokios Tokelés (n 94) para 1, where the Tribunal confirmed that Ukraine had committed itself to the exclusivity of
ICSID proceedings and, hence, to the exclusion of domestic and administrative remedies, such that the parties must ‘refrain
from initiating or pursuing proceedings in any other forum in respect of the subject matter of the dispute before ICSID’.

100 Millicom International Operations BV and Sentel GSM SA v Republic of Senegal, ICSID Case No ARB/08/20,
Decision on the Application of Provisional Measures (9 December 2009), where the Tribunal held that local court
proceedings, commenced on the same day as the ICSID arbitration, concerned the same set of facts and ordered the
local proceedings to be discontinued.

101 Plama Consortium (n 89).

102 Caratube International Oil Company LLP and Devincci Salah Hourani v Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No
ARB/13/13 (4 December 2014) paras 134—5, confirming that a ‘particularly high threshold must be overcome before an
ICSID tribunal can indeed recommend provisional measures regarding criminal investigations conducted by a state’ and
that ‘it would take exceptional circumstances to recommend that a State refrain from conducting criminal investigations,

. including joining in already pending criminal proceedings, possibly in another State. The Claimants would have to
establish that the Respondent’s investigations and participation ... in the criminal proceedings ... constitute an
impermissible act that prevents them from asserting their rights in this Arbitration, thus causing an irreparable harm’.

6LOZ eUNr gO UO Jesn AUedW0D adIAIaS spjaljJysas4 - seo.unosay UOHeUWOJU] Ag LGyP/EZ/6PS/E/L Ee AoeuIsqe-e|olUe/MalAaUpIsol/WOo dno‘siuuapeoek//:sdyy WOJJ pepeojuMog
FALL 2616 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 363

include City Oriente v Ecuador,'"* Quiborax v Bolivia'™* and Hydro v Albania."°? Bach
case displays a sensitivity to perceived interference with State sovereignty,'°° a refusal
to restrain domestic criminal process simply in order to preserve the status quo and
avoid the exacerbation of hostility'’’ and a conclusion that the order is specifically
required to protect the procedural integrity of the arbitration.'°* Very frequently, the
high threshold is not met, and the order is refused: Caratube v Kazakhstan,'°? PNG v
Papua New Guinea,''° and Teinver v Argentina”

The third category is where the ASI is issued to prevent a domestic proceeding
from continuing or being enforced—not because it conflicts with the investment
treaty arbitration jurisdiction or because it interferes with the imtegrity of the
investment treaty arbitration proceedings but, rather, based on non-aggravation
principles in order to preserve the status quo. This was the jurisdiction invoked by
the Chevron v Ecuador A&SKs. Schreuer records that a note to Arbitration Rule 39 in
its 1968 version stated that Article 47 is based on the principle that once a dispute
is submitted to arbitration the parties “should not take steps that might aggravate
or extend their dispute or prejudice the execution of the award’.’’? Some tribunals
have used such language in granting provisional measures.!? Others, however,
have concluded that aggravation in the abstract is insufficient. In Plama v Bulgaria,
the Tribunal held that the domestic insolvency and tax proceedings sought to be
restrained would not aggravate the status quo, in the sense that they ‘threaten|]
the abilicy of the Arbitral Tribunal to grant the relief which a party seeks’.'* In
other words, an ASIis not appropriate simply to hold the position. A similar point
was made in Occidental v Ecuador:

iP]rovisional measures, when granted as measures required to prevent aggravation of the
dispute, have always been directed at the behaviour of parties to the dispute, whether
they consisted of measures required to maintain-—or restore-—peace between them, or to
prevent one party from initiating or pursuing parallel litigation, for example in the

103 Ciry Oriente (n 04) para 63: the proceedings subjected to the AST included criminal complaints filed against three
executives alleging embezzlement precisely for not paving the amounts required by the 2006 Law.

1% Ouiborax SA, Non-Metallic Minerals SA and Allan Fosk Kaphin vo Phwinational Stare of Bolivia, (CSU Case Ne
ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010) 46, where the Tribunal ordered Bolivia to take all
appropriate measures to suspend certain criminal proceedings ‘directly related to this arbirration....or engagmg ina anv
other course of action which may jeopardize the procedural integrity of this arbitration’.

08 Bydro Sri and others v Republic of Albania, UCS2D Case No ARB/15/28, Order on Provisional Measures (3
March 2016) paras 3.40-3.41, where, despite accepting that ‘the strongest of reasons need to be shown for impeding
{a criminal investigation commenced pursuant to international obligations]’, the test was satisfied as the possible
incarceration of two individuals would affect their ability to adequately put their cases and participate in the
arbitration; whereas the provisional messures would only delay the criminal proceedings.

106 Cry Oriente Ga 94) para 62.

"7 Ouiborax (2 104) para 139.

108 ibid para 148.

109 Caratube International (a 102) paras 145-9, where the Claimants showed a certain need for pretection but were
unable ‘concretely and specifically’ to prove that an irreparable harm to their rights requiring urgent relief.

O° PNG Sustainable Development Program Lad v Independent State of Papua New Guinea UOSUD Case No ARB/13/32,
Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures (21 January 2015) paras 128-47, where the Claimants
failed ro demonstrate that an order directing the respondent to refrain from any criminal prosecution of employees,
servants or agents of the Claimant, or the deportation of an eniployee, was necessary or urgent.

1 Dinner SA, Transportes de Cercanias SA and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur SA v Argentine Republic, (CSTD Case No
ARB/G9/1, Decision on Provisional Measures (8 April 2016) paras 228-9, finding that, as the arbitral proceedings are
nearing their end, there is only a limited possibility that the criminal proceedings and investigation can now affect the
procedural integrity of the arbitration; but indicating that it would be prepared to protect counsel of the parties if they
properly fall within the scope of the investigation (which was unclear).

WZ Sohrevuer and others (n 82) 793.

113 See eg Casado v Chile (n 94); Agurix Corp uv Argentine Republic, YCSUD Case No ARB/01/12, Decision on
Jurisdiction (8 December 2003) 2-3. See generally Luttrell (n 6).

2 Dlama Consortium (a 89) paras 42, 45.

B64 IGSID Rewew VOL. 34

national courts, thereby directly undermining the international proceedings. Provisional
measures are not designed merely to mitigate the final amount of damages. Indeed, if
they were so intended, provisional measures would be available to a clairmant in almost
every case. In any situation arsing from an illegal act, the mere passage of time
aggravates the damages that can ultimately be granted and it is well known that this is not
a sufficient basis for ordering provisional measures.'*?

Some tribunals have granted ASIs partly, though not entirely, based on the
principle of not aggravating the status quo. Por instance, in City Oriente v Ecuador,
the Tribunal granted an ASI restraining all yucicial proceedings arising from the
underlying contract or the 2006 Model Law Gwhich effectively overrode and
altered the contractual bargain} that was the subject of the ICSID proceedings.''®
City Oriente relied on the PCY) Electricity Company decision.’ A similar approach
was followed by decisions in Perenco v Ecuador''® and Burlington v Ecuadar,'**
which related to the same 2006 Model Law. The guiding principle of these
decisions, which also fall partly into the first and second categories above, was to
preserve the parties’ allegedly ongoing coramercial relationship on the originalby
agreed terms pending determination of the complaints regarding their alteration.

This principle was estended somewhat in Quantum v DRC, where a raining
concession had allegedly been expropriated and mining ceased.'°° The claimants
sought several varieties of orders so as to preserve the status quo, including
preventing or cancelling the transfer of its mining permits and barring the
Democratic Republic of Congo CDRC) from enforcing or executing the two
decisions of its national courts relating to the alleged expropriation. The Tribunal’s
original procedural order recommended an interim suspension of enforcement
rmeasures. Sore months lacer, however, after full argument, the Tribunal revisited
its earher order. With respect to the first domestic court proceeding, it observed that
the judgment was fully executed so no further executory steps could be taken. With
respect to the second proceeding, it observed that an appeal was taking place and
that the decision would not be enforceable until after it was deterrnined. Provisional
measures were thus neither necessary nor urgent.

Finally, and for cornplereness, ASIs can potentially be awarded as final relief. While
rare in practice, non-pecuniary awards are possible in investment treaty arbitration,
including ICSED, arbitrations’? In AT4 v Jordan,’ an ICSID Tribunal ordered a
permanent AST in a final award in 2010 to remedy a statutory extinguishment of the
ATA’s right to commercial arbitration. The Tribunal held that the extinguishment
was contrary to the Torkey-—Jordan BIT and that the prior arbitration agreement

3 Occidental vu Ecuador (n 85) para 97.

6 Ci Orieme (n 94).

4? sbid para 88. The Tribunal described the ‘facts and the decision [of the PCH as
instant case’. Alectricizy Company Cr 39).

18 Poyenco in 86).

HO Burlington Resources (n 86), where the Tribunal ordered the enforcement proceedings to be discontinued and
suspended and for all disputed monies to instead be paid into am escrow account pending determination of the
dispute.

#29 nrernational Quantum Resources Limited, Frontier SPRL Compagnie Miniére de Sakania SPRL v Democratic Republic
of the Congo, ICSID Case Noa ARB/160/21, Procedural Order No 3 (28 November 2011).

121 Soe Christoph H Schreuer, “Alternative Remedies in Investment Arbitration’? (2016) 301) J Damages Intl Arb 1;
Christoph FH Schreuer, ‘Non Pecuniary Remedies in LCSID Arbitration’ (2004) 20(4) Arb fnti 325.

122 474 Construction, Industrial and Trading Company v Hashemite Kingdom of fordan, {CSIR Case No ARB/OS8/62,
Award (18 May 2610) paras 3131-3.

4
1
t

actually closely connected to the

FALL 2016 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 565

should be restored.’“°? This, in turn, required the conflicting domestic court
proceedings to be immediately and unconditionally terrninated. In a subsequent
interpretation of its award, the tribunal confirmed that the award barred any further
judicial proceedings in Jordan or elsewhere on the substance of the dispute.‘**

But there are limits. Pursuant to Article 35 of the International Law Commission’s
(LC) Articles on State Responsibility, restitution will not be ordered where it is
materially impossible or would impose a disproportionate burden on the respondent
compared to compensation.'*° As the Occidental Tribunal found, a claim for interim
measures founded on a request of final relief by specific performance will be refused
if the specific perforrmance is not possible or would unduly interfere with State
SOVerelgnty:

To bmpose on a sovereign State reinstatement of a foreign investor in is concession, after
a nationalization or termination of a concession license or contract by the State, would
constitute a reparation disproportional [sic] to its mterference with the sovereignty of the
State when compared to monetary cornpensation. ‘7°

A. A Further Digression ...

A typical investment treaty arbitration article might stop here and move directly to
offering observations on the Chevron v Ecuador case. This article takes a shght
detour. It goes on to consider ASIs in the context of transnational litigation. The
reason for this detour is that domestic courts have now gained considerable
experience with ASIs. Domestic courts are also conscious that when they seek to
interfere with the proceedings of equivalently sovereign foreign courts, they risk
inviting an army’s race of tit-for-tat orders.'“’ Comity becomes important because
the sense, and the risk, of interference with another legal systern is real. The result
has been the creation of an increasingly sophisticated jurisprudence. Furthermore,

the three categories of ASIs im transnational lingation broadly mirror the three
categories emerging from investment treaty arbitration ASIs. It is respectfully
submitted that, despite the different context, domestic court furisprudence is
instructive for investment treaty arbitration tribunals in considering when and how
they should issue ASIs.

123 Noreement berween the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Republic of Turkey Concerning the Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments (signed 2 August 1993, entered into force 23 January 2006) (ordan-Turkey
BIT).

12) ATA Construction, Industrial and Trading Company uv Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, ICSEID Case No ARB/O8/02,
Decision on Interpretation and on the Request for Provisional Measures (7 March 20131) para 45. Given this
interpretation, the Tribunal concluded that a related provisional measures request was ‘moot’ (para 46).

#25 Schreuer (2 121) 8. International Law Commission (LLC), Articles on Responsibiliry of States for internationally
Wrongful Acts, UN Doc A/56/83 (2001).

"29 Occidental v Ecuador ( 85) para 84.

27 See eg the Laker Airways litigation saga where courts in the United Kingdom and USA issued a string of anti-
suit and anti-anti-suit inianctions. For the United Kingdom, see Brinsh Airways Rd vw Laker Airways Lid, [1984] QB
142; British Airways Ba v Laker Airways Lid, {1965} AC 38; Midland Bank v Laker Airways Led, (1986) 1 All ER 526.
Bor the USA, see Laker Girways v Sabena, Belgian World Airlines, 733 F 2d 909 (DC Cir 198495 Laker Girvoays v Pan
Am World Airways, 339 F Supp 1124 (DDC 1983); Laker Airways v Pan Am World Airways, 377 F Supp 348 (DDC
1983). For a thoughtful overview, see George A Bermann “Vhe Use of Anti-Suit Injunctions in International
Litigation’ (1990) 28 Columbia J Intl L 389,

566 IGSID Rewew VOL. 34

B. The Common Law Roots of ASIs

A&ls are originally a device of the comamon law, with the earliest known examples
found in English law.'*° In the USA, ASIs were traditionally used to regulate ‘sister-
state practice’!°" and have long been a feature of transnational litigation.’*° In civil
law countries, ASIs are not unknown, but they appear to be used relatively rarely.’*!

English ASIs operate in personam and are not directed to the foreign court
itself.'°* The same is generally true in the USA,'’? though George Bermann has
suggested that American courts have generally refused to distinguish between
addressing an injunction to parties before a court and addressing an injunction to
the court ieself.'?* It is recogmzed that, however expressed, ASIs do have an
indirect effect upon the foreign proceedings, and for this reason, caution is
required./°? Julian Lew has explained that, in English practice, ‘fallthough the
injunction acts in personam and is not directed at the foreign court this is not how
it is always perceived’.’*° Adrian Briggs has, more forthrightly, written that:

ii}f the foreign court has been seised with proceedings, the idea that it is not interfered
with when a court orders an anti-suit injunction is sirmply not credible ... foreign courts
have been quick to say that they feel interfered with and are not mollified by the English
court issuing professions of respect and saying they are not interfering ... m the few
reported cases in which a foreign court has issued an anti-suit injunction aimed at a party
who is bringing proceedings in the English courts, the English judge has been
spectacularly cross about it}?!

Some of this flavour can be found in the 2009 decision of the European Court
of Justice in the West Tankers case, which prohibited even ASIs in support of
arbitration agreements within the European Union. The Court described such
ASIs as ‘obstructing the court of another Member State’ from determining
whether or not it had jurisdiction pursuant to Council Regulation GiC) 44/2001

and ‘also runs counter to the trust which Member States accord to one another’s

legal systems and judicial insticurions’.'*°

185 See eg carly cases such as Langdale’s Case, (1609) 77 Eng Rep 1338 (KB); Filler’: Case, (1607) 77 Eng Rep
1322 (KB), in which orders of prohibition were directed towards the Ecclesiastical Courts. For the earliest ASIs in
respect of foreign legal proceedings, see eg Bushby v Munday, (1823) 3 Madd 297; Carron Iron Co v Metaren, (1855)
AL Cas 416. See generally Trevor Hartley, ‘Cormity and the Use of Antisuit Injunctions in International Linigation’
(1987) 35 Am J Comp L 487.

"29 Bermann (n 127) 594.

430 See generally Born (n 8) 1294-7; and the cases summarized in Bermann (n 127) 589; Daniel S Tan, ‘Ant-Suit
Injunctions and the Vexing Preblem of Comity’ (2003) 45(2) Virginia J Int! L 283.

13 Born (n 8) 1297 observes that ‘[i]n contrast to the common law approach, civil courts have generally refused to
grant antisuit orders, including to enforce arbitration agreements. In most instances, civil law courts are not even
requested to order antisuit inhanctive relief, because it is clear that no such remedy is available. Gaillard observes,
however, thar the use of AST has now spread to at least some civil law countries. Emmanuel Gaillard (ed), Anu-Suit
Injunctions in fnternational Arbitration Curis 2003) 1-2.

132 Société Aerospatiale v Lee Kui Jak, [1987] 1 AC 871, §92 (PC) (per Lord Goff).

193 See eg Ouaak v Kiynveld Peat Marwick Goerdeler Bedrijfsrevisoren, (2004) 361 F 3d 11, 16 1" Cin.

5% Bermann (na £27) 589.

135 Sociéid Aerospatiale (n 132) 892 (per Lord Goff). See also Bermann Ga 127) 589: “That anti-suit injunctions are
addressed to private persons within the jurisdiction of the enjoining courr (operaring against rhem in personam),
rather than directly ro the foreign court whose proceedings are at issue, does not substantially Jessen the element of
conflict.’

3° Titen Lew, ‘Anti-Suit Injunctions Issued by National Courts te Prevent Arbitration Proceedings’ in Gaillard
(n 134) 25, 30.

137 Adrian Briges, Principle of Comity in Private International Law (Hague Academy of International Law 2012) 125-
6, ch 3 ‘Comity in the Law of Jurisdiction to Adjudicate’,

8 Case 185/67, West Tankers Inc v Alhangs SoA (formerly Riunione Adriatica DN Sicuria SpA) (The Front Comor),
[2009] ECR 663, para 30. Council Regulation (EC) 44/2001 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of
judgments in civil and commercial matters [2001} Of L42/1.

FALL 2616 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 5307

Despite the controversies to which they have given rise from time to time,'”?
ASis are undoubtedly an important and powerful tool for transnational litigation.
ASIs are now a regular feature of both English and US court practice and have
been ordered in most Cormonwealth or former Commonwealth nuriscdictions,
including Singapore,'*° Canada,'*! Australia'** and Bermuda.'*°

C. Three Mam Categories of Common Law ASIs

The growing use of ASIs has ied to increasing refinement as to the
appropriate basis of their exercise. This refinement has not been merely a
matter of jurisdiction. In England, for instance, the jurisdictional basis for ASIs is
the general power to issue injunctions, which, in itself, is not especially
informative.'** The courts have accordingly been required to develop principles
to guide the appropriate exercise of nidicial discretion. This has meant that the
requirements for an ASI differ in certain important respects from those for a
Standard injunction.

It has also led to a clear taxonomy of ASI categories. First, there are situations
in which the foreign proceeding is commenced in breach of an arbitration
agreement. Here, the leading English authority has for over 20 vears been The
Angelic Grace,‘ in which Lord Justice Millet (as he then was), announced that
the time had come to ‘lay aside the ritual incantation that this is a jurisdiction
which should be exercised sparingly and with great caution’. An injunction should
be granted to restrain foreign proceedings in breach of an arbitration agreement
‘on the simple and clear ground that the defendant has promised not to bring
them’.'*° In 2013, this approach was taken to its logical conclusion in Ust-
Kamenogorsk vu AES Ust-Kamenogorsk, ta which the United Kingdom Supreme
Court held that an AST was available to enforce an agreement to arbitrate, even if
no arbitration proceedings were in train or even contemplated. '*’

Second, there are situations in which the foreign proceeding is commenced in
breach of an exclusive jurisdiction agreement. Here, based on authorities such as
Denoghue v Armco,’ and Turner v Grovit,'*" an ASI is prima facie available. In the
absence of the New York Convention for choice-of-court agreerments,'?’ the
protection of exclusive jurisdiction agreements is more discretionary than it is for
arbitration agreements. The prima facie entitlement to an ASI may be defeated by

1° An early and famous example being the 1980s Laker Airways Htigation, resulting in ASIs being issued on both
sides of the Atlantic. For a detailed account, see Bermann ( 127) 591-4.

189 WSG Nimbus Pte Lid v Board of Control for Cricket in Sri Lanka, [2002] 3 SLR 603 CHC); Tiong Vary Sumito v
Antug Investments Pie Lid, [2000] 4 SLR (UK) 732 (CA),

MA Anchen Products fue v British Columbia (Worker’s Conyensation Board), [1993] 1 SCR 897 (SC).

12 CSR Lid v Cigna insurance Australia Lid & Ors, (1997) 146 ALR 402.

3 OAO CT Mobile v IPOC International Growth Fund, (2006) Bermuda LR 69 (CA).

184 See Senior Courts Act (formerly the Supreme Court Act) (1981) 5 37: "The High Court may by order (whether
interlocutory or final grant an injunction or appoint a receiver in all cases in which it appears to the court to be just
and convenient to da so’. See also Arbitration Act 1996, ss 44, 72.

145 Avesehhy Charis Cia Maritime SA v Pagnan SpA (The ‘Angelic Grace’), [19951 1 Llovd’s Rep 87.

46 ibid 96.

17 Trey -Kamenogorsk Hydropower Plant $8C v AES Usi-Kamenogorsk Hydropower Plant LLP, [2013] UEKSC 35.

8S Donohue v Armco Inc, [2001] UKEHL 64, [2004] 1 All ER 749.

189 Tener v Grovit, [2001] UKHL 65, [2002] 1 WLR 107.

150 Convention on Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (opened for signature 10 June 1958,
emteted inte force 7 fune 1939) New York Convention). A matter sought to be resmedied by the Hague Convention
on Choice of Court Agreements (opened for signature 30 June 2005, now ratified by the United Mexican States, the
European Union and Singapore and in force) <hrtps:/Mwww.hcch.net/en/instruments/conventions/full-text/
Pcid=98 > acceased 14 fune 2016.

B68 IGSID Rewew VOL. 34

the defendant showing strong reasons for an ASI not to issue. Bur AGIs are still
routinely granted in order to enforce the parties’ bargain.

The third category is where foreign proceedings are found to be unconscionable,
vexatious or oppressive because they have been commenced in an inappropriate
forum, This situation typically arises im cases where, under English forum non
conveniens rules, England would consider itself the appropriate place for a trial, but
the proceedings have been commenced elsewhere in a case of “unwarranted forum
shopping’.'?' In this case, and only where England itself has a sufficient interest in
the dispute,’°* it has jurisdiction to restrain the foreign proceedings.’~°

In Star Reefers vu FRC Group, an ASl was discharged on appeal as the lower court
judge had erred by taking no account of considerations of cormity in deciding that
Russian proceedings were vexatious and England was the natural forum.’°* Lord
Justice Rix held that, in circumstances were there was no underlying agreement to
arbitrate or litigate and the Russian proceedings were commenced first:

fijhere 1s, as it seems to me, something of a touch of egoistic paternalism in an Enghsh
court injuncting contimuation of the foreign proceedings. ... In any event, in such
circumstances the consideranons of comity become of especial importance. The judge
however took no account of such considerations. That is an error in the exercise of his
discretion, having found the conditions for the exercise of his power made good. In my
judgment ... the considerations of comity should have in any event caused the English
court to pause long and hard before granting an injunction in such a case.’*”

It is possible, though rare, for an Enghsh court to order an anti-enforcement
ASI after the foreign proceedings are complete. Such an injunction was first
granted in the 1928 case of Allerman Lines v Read, to restrain enforcement of a
Turkish judgment that had been obtained in breach of contract and by fraud.'?* Ir
was argued on appeal that, while an ASI can be granted during the pendency of
foreign proceedings, there was no jurisdiction to restrain a person who had
obtained jucdgrnent from reaping its fruits. This was given short shrift by Lord
Justice Scrutton, who held that:

ii}f there is no authority for this it is time that we made one, for I cannot conceive that if
ao Enghsh Court finds a British subject taking proceedings in breach of his contract in a
foreign (Court, supporting those proceedings, and obtaining a judgment, by fraudulent
lies, it is powerless to interfere to restrain him from seeking to enforce that judgment.’”’

The jurisdiction has been exercised only sparingly since. In AD & FP Man v
Haryanto, Justice Steyn (as he then was) concluded that it would be an affront to
the Indonesian courts and an iulegitimate interference, albeit indirectly, with the
process of courts worldwide to grant an extraterritorial ASI prohibiting enforce-
ment of an Indonesian court judgment.’°? In Akai v People’s Insurance, Justice
Thomas declined an anti-enforcement injunction in respect of Singaporean

131 Edwin Peel, “Anti-Suit Injunctions: The House of Lords Declines ro Act as International Policeman’ 114 (1998)
Law Q Rev 243, 543. See also Deutsche Bank AG v Highland Crusader Offshore Partners LP, 12009] 2 CLC 45, [2010]
1 WLR 1023, para 50.

1% dirbus Industrie GIE v Parl, [1999] 1 AC 119 CHL).

153 Société Aerospatiale (a 132),

4 Star Reefers Pool Inv v JFC Group Co Ltd, [2012] EWCA Civ 14, [2012] 1 CLOG 294.

155 jbid paras 39-40.

oe Ellerman Lines v Read, {1928} 2B 144 (CA).

7 ibid 152-3.

158 & F Man (Sugar) Lid v Haryanto (No 2), [1991] GB 161, 167-8 GHO).

FALL 2016 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 569

enforcement proceedings of an Australian judgrnent, since there were very
powerful arguments that it was more consistent with comity to leave it to the
Singaporean courts to decide what course to take in light of Singaporean law.'°? In
Masri v Consolidated Contractors, Lord Justice Lawrence Collins (as he then was}
observed that it was ‘plainly a very serious matter for the English court to grant an
injunction to restrain enforcement in a foreign country of a judgment of a court of
that country’ and that ‘it will be a rare case in which an injunction will be
granted’.'°° In Bank St Petersburg v Arkhangelsky, an ASI was granted, on appeal,
to prevent the enforcement of Russian judgments obtained in breach of a specific
exclusive jurisdiction agreement in favour of English courts.'°' The case suggested
that the basis on which an anti-enforcement ASI might be obtained is similar to
ASI pfurisprudence generally.

The relevant principles were recently revisited by the Court of Appeal in
Ecobank v Tanoh,'“* in which the Claimant bank sought an ASI to prevent
enforcement of judgments obtained in Vogo and the Cote @ivoire allegedly in
breach of arbitration agreements. An issue was the bank’s delay in seeking the ASI,
with the result that it was now not challenging the foreign proceedings but, rather,
the enforcement of their result. The Court of Appeal held the delay was fatal.
Lord Justice Christopher Clarke held that the longer an action continues without
any attempt to restrain it, the less hkely a court is to grant an injunction.
Considerations of comity have stronger force. He added:

To the case of anti-enforcemernt inpuncnons there are further considerations which
underpin the need for caution expressed in the cases. First, an order precluding
enforcernent ... will, if obeyed, in effect prechude the consideration by [foreign] courts ...
as to whether they should recognise or enforce the jidgement in question. That is a
matter which it is, intrinsically, for the relevant court to decide according to its applicable
law. Moreover, in so far as the order prevents enforcement in the country of the court
which gave the judgmenr it is, indirectly, an interference with the execution in its own
country of the judgment which the court has given and can expect to be obeyed.'©’

Accordingly, even though the basis of the application was to ensure adherence to
an arbitration agreement, an ASI was not appropriate.

In short, then, the notion of comity has underpinned English case law on ASIs.
It was the concept by which Lord Goff developed his thinking from Société
Aerospatiale v Lee Kui Fak to Airbus v Patel and prevented English courts from
setting themselves up as ‘world policemen’ of commercial activities.’°* It has less
force where an ASI is being used merely to hold parties to their agreements.
However, it comes back into play if the ASI is being sought at an enforcement
stage because matters of recognition and enforcement are intrinsically matters for
the courts at the place of enforcement.

The notion of comity is also important in US case law.’®? Overall, the
approaches of US courts to ASIs have been described as varying from more liberal

199 Akai Pry Lid v People’s Insurance Co Ltd, [1998] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 90.

189 Atasei » Consolidated Contractors Inernational (UK) Lyd (No 3), [2008] EWCA Civ 625, 533.
'°! Bank St Petersburg OFSC v Arkhangelsky, [2014] 1 WLR 4360 (CA).

102 Peobank Transnanonal Inc v Tanoh, (2015) EWCA Civ 1369.

9 ibid 2262.

104 Société Aerospatiale (m 132); Airbus Industrie (n 152).

'85 See eg Tan (n 130) 298.

Q

=
aA
tA

aoey
ny

ay
tay

7% 4
SoM

Keres tien
geen ees
sae cae er’

EOMUIOT GHAIOS

mya fy
stb PS
B70 IGSID Rewew VOL. 34

(the Fifth, Seventh Ninth Circuits),'°° to more conservative (the First, Second,
Third, Sixth and District of Columbia Circuits).*°’

There bas also been debate berween different federal circuits as to whether
comity is a separate element to be accounted for im determining whether to grant
an ASI or a less explicit factor used principally to confirm the need for care and
caution before granting an ASI.'°° In the approach favoured by the First Circuit,
the power to enjoin foreign litigation omist be tempered by the accepted
proposition that parallel proceedings on the same claim may take place
simultaneously and that the decisional calculus must account for considerations
of international comity because, ‘even though an international antisuit injunction
operates only against the parties, it effectively restricts in the jurisdiction of a
foreign sovereign’s courts’. 17°

The enquiry starts with a rebuttable presumption that the injunction should not
be issued. The moving party must then overcome the presumption by adducing
factors that are then balanced against comity considerations. In the ‘highly
nuanced’ exercise of determining the appropriateness of an ASI, the courts must
adopt an approach that accords ‘appreciably greater weight to considerations of
international comity’.’“' In the approach favoured by the Second Circuit, comity
iS NOt a separate counterweight factor but, rather, is taken into account indirectly.
Only the ‘strongest equitable factors’ and the ‘most cormpelling public policies of
the forum’ would substantiate the grant of an AST.’

Whichever approach is adopted, however, it is acknowledged that ASIs are
powerful instruments that must be used carefully. As Gary Born explains, US
courts are generally more hesitant than English courts about the use of ASIs to
restrain foreign proceedings. They have certainly been prepared to grant ASIs
prohibiting parties frorn proceeding with foreign litigation in violation of a valid
arbitration agreement:

bur subject to significantly greater conditions and restrictions than im England, Singapore
and most other common law jurisdictions. In general, US courts have been reluctant to
grant antisult myunctions, even where parties have commenced foreign htgation in
violation of their agreement to arbitrate, except m compelling cases where there is a
special need for such relief.

Overall, the US case law is distributed along similar lines to the English cases.
Aidthough the purisdiction is wide, and the discretionary considerations vary, almost
all ASIs are concerned either with enforcing party agreernent as to where to litigate
or arbitrate or, in the absence of such agreement, ensuring that litigation takes
place in its most natural forum.

See eg Kaepa fuc v Achilles Corp 76 B.3Ad 624 (Sth Cir. 1996). See also Van (a 130) 289,
7 See eg Tan (n 130) 289. See also Born (mn 8) 1295.
" See eg Quaak (nm 133).

499 See eg Paramedics Electromedicina Comercial Lida v GE Medical Systems Information Technologies Inc, 369 F 3d 645
(2d Cir 2004), See also China Trade & Deu Corp v MV Cheong Yong, 827 F 2d 33 (2d Cir 1987), setting out a seven-
factor test for the grant of an ASI.

119 Opsaeade Ga 033) 17.

"T dhyich,

172 Poramedics (n 169) 634,

13 Born (a 8) 1294.

=
aA
tA

aoey
ny

ay
tay

7% 4
SoM

Keres tien
geen ees
sae cae er’

EOMUIOT GHAIOS

mya fy
stb PS
FALL 2616 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 374

Vi. DISCUSSION

We come back, at last, to the Chevron case. What is one to make of this
extraordinary sequence of events? One option would be to conclude that extreme
circumstances justify extrerne orders and suggest that there is httle profit in
looking more closely at the anti-enforcernent ASIs granted by the Tribunal. After
all, Chevron’s complaint appears to have been vindicated. The Lago Agrio
proceedings have been found by two United States Federal Courts to have been
procured by fraud.

Nonetheless, Chevron is a rare case where an ASI has been ordered by an
investment treaty arbitration tribunal to restrain allegedly offending court
proceedings that were commenced in their proper forum, did not conflict with
the relevant investment treaty arbitration proceeding (but, indeed, were its subject)
and were not justified by seeking to preserve an ongoing commercial relationship.
Although some analogies could be drawn to the PCT} Electricity Company case and
the ne of investment treaty arbitration cases beginning with City Oriente «
Ecuador, they are not exact. In any event, the Tribunal did not seek to draw any
analogies or cite to any case law.

If effective, the Chevron ASIs would have suspended the result of the Lago Agrio
proceedings. In Ecobank, the Enghsh Court of Appeal expressed concern at the
disrespect such an order conveys to foreign courts that have already expended the
resources in progressing a case through to judgment.’’* Moreover, although the
Chevron ASts solely concerned enforcement of the Lago Agrio proceedings, they
still affected Ecuador’s judicial branch, which is responsible for certifying
judgements for enforcement. Ecuador was not a party to the proceeding and
could not be chrected simply to suspend or withdraw the Lago Agric proceedings.
To be effective, the ASI had to operate in some way upon a foreign judiciary.

One might suggest, as did the Hague District Court, that the brevity of the
Tribunal’s anafysis reflects the fact that the Tribunal strongly and justly suspected,
but could mot yet prove, fraud. So it acted firmly but discretely to achieve fustice.
However, the whole point of interim measures is that one cannot yet say (as could
the Court in the Ellerman Lines vu Read case) that the alleged fraud has taken
place.” Between 2010 and 2013, prior to the merits stage of the proceedings, no
evidence proving fraud was considered at a contested hearing. Fraud is not, at least
not exphecitly, the basis for the Trbunal’s successive decisions. Whatever its
suspicions, the Tribunal was scrupulous to repeat that it was not in any way
prejudging the merits.'’° Accordingly, although judicial economy may well have
been a prudent course for a tribunal faced with a difficult situation, legitimate
questions remain about whether the ASIs were an appropriate exercise of discretion.
This is especially so if they are to have an informal precedent value for future cases.

As Born writes, an ASI ‘is for obvious and serious reasons a delicate authority
that should be exercised with special care and restrain’.'"’ It is submitted that the

"8 Peobank (a 162) paras 133-4: ‘Comity between courts, and indeed considerations of public policy, require,
where possible the avoidance of such waste. ... A foreign court may justifiably take exception to an approach under
which an injunction will Gf obeyed) frustrate all that has gone before’

175 Fiterman Lines (n 156).

17 Chevron Corporation, First Interics Award on Laterim Measures Ga 30) 17; Chevron Corporation, Second Usterixm
Award on Interim Measures (n 31) 4; Chevron Corporation, Fourth Interim Award on Interim Measures (n 34) 31.

" Gary Born, International Commercial Arbitration (2edn, Wolters Kluwer 2014) 2503.

=
aA
tA

aoey
ny

ay
tay

7% 4
SoM

Keres tien
geen ees
sae cae er’

Ty SOU ye
ted THIRD Ty

OUR ASL MISE LD!

ae
572 IGSID Review VOL. 31

time has core for investment treaty arbitration to recognize, as does transnational
litigation, that the need for special care and restraint is not achieved by treating
ASIs as an ordinary type of provisional or interim measure. Given their impact
upon a foreign judicial systern, cornity moust play a role. This is so whether cornity
is regarded as an additional factor or merely as a counterweight applying to the
overall test.

The proper role of comity is not yet clearly situated in the PCH/IC]
jurisprudence. Arguably, this is because comparatively few ASIs have been
issued by the IC] or its predecessors. This does not make thinking through the
comity umphications any less important. The Convention on Consular Relations,
LaGrand and Avena cases demonstrate that imbuing ASIs with authority and
efficacy is not easy. A terse pronouncement by an international court directing the
conduct of a domestic justice system may, as in those cases, prove somewhat
disappointing in practice,

By contrast, domestic courts have much experience of weighing and measuring
when an ASI is likely to overreach the bounds of comity. This explains the
categorization of ASIs based on arbitration and exclusive jurisdiction agreements
as requiring lesser considerations of comity. Such ASIs are doctrinally founded on
the notion of party consent. In transnational litigation, ASIs are also used, even in
the absence of party consent, to protect litigants from being pursued in a plainly
inappropriate forum. Here, comity plays a much larger role. Even when the
rationale for the ASI is the doubtful character of the foreign proceedings, domestic
courts tend not to measure vexatiousness absolutely but, rather, only relative to
actual or hypothetical proceedings in the natural forum. In other words, foreign
proceedings are not typically injuncted simply to hold the position or because it is
suspected that they are not up to snuff,

Should the approach be different where the ASI is sought not from a domestic
court but, instead, from an investment treaty tribunalr Arguably not. A
cornparable taxonomy of ASIs can be discerned in the investment treaty
arbitration jurisprudence. The easiest cases are those where Article 26 of the
ICSID Convention is infringed. Investment treaty arbitration, as a form of
arbitration, is necessarily founded on party consent; so conflicting Htigation on the
merits is naturally seen as a breach of the parties’ agreement.

The second category of cases comprises those that indirectly impair the
procedural integrity of the investment treaty arbitration process. These are also,
ulumately, founded on party consent. However, due to the inherently sensitive
judgment calls in conchiding that the investment treaty arbitration process is
sufficiently threatened by domestic proceedings that those proceedings should be
suspended, comity and restraint are given weight. This is most obvious in the
decisions of tribunals in response to invitations to interfere with domestic criminal
proceedings. Gus Van Harten has observed that, even though investment treaty
arbitration decisions are not overwhelmingly characterized by comity and restraint,
these principles are generally identifiable in investment treaty arbitration decisions
relating to foreign courts.'”*

It would be incongruous, it is submitted, to have significant regard for comity in
‘procedural integrity’ cases but not where one is secking to restrain foreign

(8 Gus Van Harten, Sovereign Choices and Sovereign Constraints (OUP 2013) 129.

=
aA
tA

aoey
ny

ay
tay

7% 4
SoM

Keres tien
geen ees
sae cae er’

EOMUIOT GHAIOS

mya fy
stb PS
FALL 2616 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 373

proceedings that do not impair the procedural integrity of the investment treaty
arbitration proceedings, but merely aggravate the dispute. For this reason, a blithe
application of the Electriciry Company decision or the principle of non-aggravation
should be resisted. As several investrnent treaty arbitration cases have noted, even
though the non-aggravation principle exists, it should not be pressed beyond its
proper compass. In Plama, this principle was taken to require more than increased
aggravation in the abstract, but an actual threat to the ability of the Tribunal to
grant the requested relief. In Occidental, the Tribunal confirmed that one should
not use provisional mcasures to mitigate damages.

These insights are valuable. One can only imagine the outcry were the Tribunal
in Loewen v United States to have sought to restrain the Miéssissipoi fury
proceedings or their subsequent enforcernent.'’? Indeed, the very use of
provisional measures to restrain an alleged denial of justice, even by intervening
only in the enforcement phase, is problematic. Consistent with IC] jurisprudence,
the Plama Tribunal held that provisional measures oust fall within the scope of
the final rehef sought. In the Chevron case, the notice of arbitration sought
indemnification and damages,'*° not the termination or reversal of the Lago Agrio
litigation. It remains unclear when it would be consistent with Article 35 of the
ILC Articles on State Responsibility for a tribunal to order reparation, instead of
compensation, in response to a denial of justice, even if proven.'*!

An appropriate level of comity and restraint might be mamifested through setting
an appropriately high level of urgency and irreparable harm before granting an
ASE Although these words were used by the Chevron Tribunal, the thresholds
were not clearly substantiated. Thev should be. Even where the rationale for an
ASE is concern that a civil proceeding lacks due process, and could result in a very
large damages award, the situation is inherently unhkely to be as extrerne LeGrand
and Avena, where the imminent threat to human hfe made it plain that monetary
compensation would be inadequate.

An appropriate fevel of comity and restraint could also be manifested by
demanding strong reasons before deciding to intervene at all. In the Chevron case,
the Tribunal declared that it was, in realty, the only tribunal in the world that
could act.'"* This may have been so. Were it truly needing to intervene simply to
protect the exchisivity or integrity of its own ICSID proceedings, this point would
have had much force. However, as the Plama Tribunal observed, one cannot
convert every collateral proceeding into a threat to the integrity of the ongoing
ICSID proceedings. Here, the problem was not potential interference with the
ICSID proceedings but, rather, the apparently egregious nature of the ongoing
denial of justice that was the subject of those proceedings.

Where there is no tangible risk of interference, the admonition of Lord Justice
Rix in Star Reejfers to avoid the appearance of ‘egotistic paternalism’ should be
heeded.'® Even if the Chevron Tribunal, alone, had jurisdiction to make an
extreme order, that does not necessarily make it appropriate for the Tribunal to do
so. The appeal in Star Reefers was allowed on the basis that the judge had taken no

To Loewen Group, Inc and Raymond L Loewen v United States of America, 1CSED Case No ARB(AFY/98/3, Award (26
Jane 2003).
Oo oorsr + . ys You: . . .
189 Chevron Corporation, Claimants’ Notice of Arbitration (a 18} 18.
181 Compare Chcidenial v Ecuador (n 85) para 84.
82 Chevron Corporation, Fourth Interim Award on Interim Measures (n 34) paras 81-2.
183 Svar Reefers (n 154) para 39.

=
aA
tA

aoey
ny

ay
tay

7% 4
SoM

Keres tien
geen ees
sae cae er’

EOMUIOT GHAIOS

mya fy
stb PS
B74 IGSID Rewew VOL. 34

account of comity considerations. Those same comity considerations apply to an
investment treaty tribunal that is not, equally, a part of the Ecuadorian court
system, The role of comity may be even more important in an ICSYD arbitration.
Making worldwide orders pre-empting the decisions of other courts or tribunals is
a far cry from the humility of the verb ‘recommend’. The drafters of the FCSID
Convention were aware of comity issues and sought to guard against them. This
reticence should not be overlooked entirely by modern tribunals, even if, following
LaGrand, they have now assumed the power to issue provisional orders rather than
recommendations. "4

For good reason, anti-enforcernent ASIs, while not unknown, are extremely
rare. As explained by the English House of Lords in Airbus, the Court of Appeal in
Ecobank and the Second Circuit Court of Appeal in Chevron, extreme care must
be taken in appearing to set oneself up as a world policeman, identifying pariah
courts and dictating to friendly courts the foreign judgrments they may enforce.
Before ordering an anti-enforcement ASI, an investment treaty tribunal should
consider and explain precisely why it is not sufficient to leave it up to each
domestic court to apply its own laws. In the Chevron saga, the Canadian courts
have demonstrated that they are pertectly capable of making their own decisions.

Finally, the investment treaty arbitration process has, and should be seen as
having, an important pubhe dimension. If one sits in yudgment on State conduct,
ome must expect to engage with, and seek to persuade, stakeholders who are not
party to the litigation. This is even more so if one is seeking to arrest the processes
of domestic institutions such as state courts. It is far from ideal for the Hague
District Court to be making allowances and drawing inferences for reasoning that
is mot present in any of the Tribunal’s successive orders. There is also a distinct
whit of hindsight in its explanation, given that another explanation is that the
Chevron Tribunal may have felt obliged to reinforce its original 2010 Order rather
than be perceived to back down in the face of seeming intransigence.

More likely, however, given their erminence and experience, is that the Chevron
Tribunal suspected or knew much more than it was prepared to cormunit to its
written decisions. In a purely commercial arbitration, concise reasoning that avoids
any suggestion of pre-judging the merits may be prudent. But investrnent treaty
tribunals, with their public dimension and insulation from appeal, must earn
authority through their words. It is precisely those unfortunate cases when the
Tribunal’s judgement puts it on a collision course with significant domestic
institutions that justification is most needed. Perhaps the fairest critique that can
made of the Chevron Tribunal is that it chose not to more completely explain why
ASIs were recqpured.

VIL. CONCLUSION
With this, we return to where we started-—-the difference between jurisdiction and

authority. One cannot demand authority. Ic must be accorded by others.’® This is

84 a * . . 4 < . ro aw _ . tye Ble .
48% Niote that the majority view that ‘recommend’ means ‘order’, while now established, is net without its dissenters.

See eg Millicom Quternational Operanons (n 100) para 49; RSAT Production Corporation v Saint Lucia, (WOSUD Case No
ARB/1 2/40, Dissenting Opinion of Edward Nottngharn (2 August 2014): “No catrer how many times in is repeated,
an order is not 4 reconmmendation”

185 Yoseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom (Clarendon 1986) 35.

=
aA
tA

aoey
ny

ay
tay

7% 4
SoM

Keres tien
geen ees
sae cae er’

EOMUIOT GHAIOS

mya fy
stb PS
FALL 2016 Orders Restraining Domestic Court Proceedings 5375

why comity is important. Investment treaty arbitration cannot expect its decisions
to be automatically authoritative, no matter how often it self-actualizes as an
international rule of law.'°* It must earn respect and legitimacy. Investment treaty
arbitration is, like national courts and other international tribunals, merely one
legal system among many. Given the scrutiny to which the systern is presently
subject,’ its most high-profile tribunals cannot afford to appear arrogant or
insensitive to the concerns of domestic legal orders. That is so ever where a
serious breach of international law appears to be taking place.

That is not at all to say tribunals must forgo ASIs. But it is to say that, whether
directly or indirectly, comity must be acknowledged and accounted for. All
provisional measures are weighty powers that must be used carefully. Bur ASIs,
where one legal order arrogates to itself the right to interfere with another, require
particular care. Investment treaty tribunals should be wary of applying a generic
provisional or interim measures test without first explaining and justifying a
tailored AST analvsis, which sets an appropriately high bar for intervention.

860@ : - - - - = mG a : :
#89 See eg Jan Paulsson, Denial of Pustice in Invernational Law (CUP 2005) 265: ‘ffin the field of international

investments, arbitral tribunals are instruments of the rule of law. Their purpose is not to favour the rich, but to enable
states to make reliable promises,

87 See eg the essays collected in Michael Waibel and others, The Backlash against Invesemenit Arbitration: Perceptions
and Reatiy (Wolters Khawer 2010); Jean Kalicki and Anna foubin-Bret, Reshaping the Invesvor-State Dispute Settlement
System (Brill Nijhoff 2015).

