Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

PART V

Remedies

20-Yannaca-20.indd 505 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:02 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

20-Yannaca-20.indd 506 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

Chapter 20

Interim Relief in International Investment
Agreements

Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler and Aurélia Antonietti*

Arbitration rules applicable in the context of investor-state disputes usually provide
that arbitral tribunals may grant interim relief under certain conditions. This chapter
will review the requirements for a party to obtain interim relief from an arbitral tribunal,
the measures that can be ordered, their nature, and effects. It will also consider whether
the parties to the dispute can seek interim relief from domestic courts rather than from
the arbitral tribunal.

A vast majority of investor-state arbitrations are initiated today on the basis of an
investment arbitration agreement (IAA), either a bilateral investment treaty (BIT) or a
multilateral investment treaty (MIT), suchas the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA). These arbitrations are most often governed by the Arbitration Rules of
ICSID, the ICSID Additional Facility, or UNCITRAL. Some BITs or MITs also refer
to arbitration under the auspices of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (SCC) or
the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC). This chapter will exclusively focus on
interim measures in the context of proceedings governed by the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, the ICSID Additional Facility Arbitration Rules (both referred to as the ICSID
system), and the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, because these are the arbitration rules
most commonly used in the context of investor-state disputes.'

* Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler is a professor at Geneva University and a partner at Lévy
Kaufmann-Kohler. Aurélia Antonietti was an associate at Lévy Kaufmann-Kohler and is a
former ICSID Counsel.

1 The majority of the decisions on interim relief in the context of investor-state disputes that have
been made public are Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal decisions or ICSID decisions, other decisions
rarely being in the public domain. Unless otherwise stated, all the ICSID decisions or orders
quoted in this chapter are available on the ICSID Website or on the ITA Website.

507

20-Yannaca-20.indd 507 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

THE POWER TO GRANT INTERIM RELIEF

The power of an arbitral tribunal to grant interim relief? is to be sought in the legal
rules that govern each proceeding.

Interim Relief in the ICSID System

ICSID Convention cases. For proceedings that are governed by the ICSID Convention,
provisions on interim relief are to be found both in the ICSID Convention and in the
ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Article 47 of the ICSID Convention allows an arbitral tribunal to recommend provi-
sional measures. It reads:

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the
circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which should be
taken to preserve the respective rights of either party.

This Article, said to have been directly inspired by Article 41 of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice (ICJ),* makes clear that the parties can agree not to allow
the tribunal the power to grant interim relief or can restrict such power (see below for
an example under NAFTA).

More details are found in ICSID Arbitration Rule 39 on Provisional Measures,
which reads:

(1) At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party may request that
provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be recommended by the
Tribunal. The request shall specify the rights to be preserved, the measures the
recommendation of which is requested, and the circumstances that require such
measures.

2 This chapter will refer to interim relief as a general expression encompassing both the “provi-
sional measures” of the ICSID system and the “interim measures” of the UNCITRAL Rules.
When addressing each particular set of rules, the chapter will refer to the designated terms.

3 CHRISTOPH SCHREUER WITH LoretTrA MALINToprPI, AUGUST REINISCH AND ANTHONY SINCLAIR, THE
ICSID Convention: A ComMENTARY, Article 47, para. 1 (Cambridge 2nd ed. 2009) [hereinafter
Schreuer et al.]. See also Victor Pey Casado and Presidente Allende Foundation v. Republic of
Chile, ICSID Case No ARB/98/2, Decision on Provisional Measures, September 25, 2001,
para. 2, French and Spanish original, English translation in 6 ICSID Reports 2004, p. 375
[hereinafter Pey Casado]. Article 41 of the Statute of the Court reads: “1. The Court shall have
the power to indicate, if it considers that circumstances so require, any provisional measures
which ought to be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party. 2. Pending the final
decision, notice of the measures suggested shall forthwith be given to the parties and to the
Security Council.” Article 41 is completed by Articles 73 to 78 of the 1978 Rules of Court. See
generally THE STATUTE OF THE INTERNATIONAL CourT oF Justice, A ComMMENTARY, Article 41,
p. 923ff. (A. Zimmermann, C. Tomuschat, K. Oellers-Frahm eds., OUP 2006) [hereinafter
Zimmermann et al.] and SHABTAI ROSENNE, PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN INTERNATIONAL LAW, THE
INTERNATIONAL CourT OF JUSTICE AND THE INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE LAW OF THE SEA (OUP
2005) [hereinafter S. Rosenne].

508 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 508 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

(2) The Tribunal shall give priority to the consideration of a request made pursuant
to paragraph (1).

(3) The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on its own initiative or
recommend measures other than those specified in a request. It may at any time
modify or revoke its recommendations.

(4) The Tribunal shall only recommend provisional measures, or modify or revoke
its recommendations, after giving each party an opportunity of presenting its obser-
vations.

(5) If a party makes a request pursuant to paragraph (1) before the constitution of
the Tribunal, the Secretary-General shall, on the application of either party, fix time
limits for the parties to present observations on the request, so that the request and
observations may be considered by the Tribunal promptly upon its constitution.
(6) Nothing in this Rule shall prevent the parties, provided that they have so stipu-
lated in the agreement recording their consent, from requesting any judicial or other
authority to order provisional measures, prior to or after the institution of the
proceeding, for the preservation of their respective rights and interests.

Arbitration Rule 39 was last modified in April 2006 with the introduction of
paragraph 5.‘ It had previously been amended in 1984 when the current paragraph 6
(formerly Article 39(5)) was added.

Additional Facility cases. Cases which fall outside of the scope of the ICSID
Convention can be administered by the Centre under the Additional Facility (AF)
Rules under certain conditions set forth in Article 4 of those rules. Interim relief in AF
proceedings is governed by Article 46 of the AF Arbitration Rules, which contains a
provision similar but not identical to ICSID Arbitration Rule 39. Article 46 reads:

(1) Unless the arbitration agreement otherwise provides, either party may at any
time during the proceeding request that provisional measures for the preservation
of its rights be ordered by the Tribunal. The Tribunal shall give priority to the
consideration of such a request.

(2) The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on its own initiative or
recommend measures other than those specified in a request. It may at any time
modify or revoke its recommendations.

(3) The Tribunal shall order or recommend provisional measures, or any modifica-
tion or revocation thereof, only after giving each party an opportunity of presenting
its observations.

(4) The parties may apply to any competent judicial authority for interim or conser-
vatory measures. By doing so they shall not be held to infringe the agreement to
arbitrate or to affect the powers of the Tribunal.

The tribunal’s power under the AF Arbitration Rules is also subject to potential
restrictions agreed by the parties. Generally speaking and except for differences that
will specifically be mentioned in the following discussion, the regime of interim relief

4 Aurélia Antonietti, The 2006 Amendments of the ICSID Rules and Regulations, 21 1CSID Rev.—
FILJ (2006).

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 509

20-Yannaca-20.indd 509 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

under the AF Arbitration Rules follows the regime of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. For
example, in the case of Metalclad v. Mexico, governed by the AF Rules and AF
Arbitration Rules, the tribunal considered that the reasoning applicable under Article 47
of the ICSID Convention was relevant in the context of these AF proceedings and,
more particularly, said that it was “no less applicable to the wording of Article 1134 of
the NAFTA.”

The powers of a tribunal under the AF Rules are subject to mandatory rules of the
law of the seat of arbitration since the AF Arbitration Rules, pursuant to their Article
1, will not apply when “in conflict with a provision of the law applicable to the arbitra-
tion from which the parties cannot derogate.”

Interim Relief Under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

The original 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules are currently undergoing a signifi-
cant revision, following the 2006 revision of the 1985 UNCITRAL Model Law. The
2006 revision replaced former Article 17 on interim measures with a new Chapter IV
bis, establishing a comprehensive legal regime on interim measures in support of
arbitration. The UNCITRAL Working Group on Arbitration and Conciliation had
drafted a revised version of the interim measures provision of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, Article 26.° At the time of the finalization of this chapter, the
Working Group had not adopted the second version of Article 26.’ The present chapter

5 Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Decision
on. a request by the respondent for an order prohibiting the claimant from revealing information
regarding ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, October 27, 1997, para. 8, http://www.economia.
gob.mx/work/snci/negociaciones/Controversias/Casos_Mexico/Metalclad/decision/decision_
interlocutoria.pdf [hereinafter Metalclad].

6 The Working Group considered that the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules were to be harmonized
with the corresponding provisions of the Model Law only where appropriate and not as a
matter of course (Report of Working Group II (Arbitration and Conciliation) on the work of its
45th Session, September 11-15, 2006, Vienna, A/CN.9/614, para. 104). Although it was gen-
erally of the view that a revision of Article 26 was needed to take into account the new provi-
sions of the Model Law, the view was also expressed that the controversial provisions of
Chapter [TV should not be included in the Arbitration Rules, in order not to endanger their
acceptability (ibid.). Subsequently, the Working Group met in New York in February 2007, in
Vienna in September 2007, in New York in February 2008 for its 48th Session (see Report A/
CN.9/646), in Vienna on September 15-19, 2008 for its 49th Session where it considered the
revised version of Articles 1 to 17 (see Note A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.151,Note A/CN.9/WG.II/
WP.151/Add.1, Note A/CN.9/WG.I/WP.154 and Report A/CN.9/665) and in New York on
February 9-13, 2009 for its 50th Session where it considered the second reading of the draft
version of Articles 18 to 26 (see Report A/CN.9/669). It then met in Vienna from September
14-18, 2009 for its 51th Session for the second reading of the draft version of Articles 27 to 39
(annotated provisional agenda, A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.155, Report A/CN.9/684). The final review
and adoption of the revised Rules should take place at the 42nd Session of the Commission in
2010 (see Report A/CN.9/684, para. 10). All the Working Group’s documents are available at
http://www.uncitral.org/uncitral/en/commission/working_groups/2Arbitration.html.

7 See Report of the Working Group on the work of its 47th Session, A/CN.9/641, pp. 10—12;
Note by the Secretariat, 46th Session, New York, February 5—9, 2007, A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.145/

510 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 510 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

examines the draft revised Article 26 as it stood in September 2009, since it represents
a significant departure from the original UNCITRAL Rules. The new Rules, if and
when adopted, will be applicable to arbitration agreements concluded after the date of
adoption of the revised version of the Rules*; whereas the 1976 Arbitration Rules will
continue to apply to pending cases and, if the parties so wish, to cases initiated after the
entry into force of the new Rules.’ The two sets of Rules will be applicable to investor-
state proceedings as long as no new set of rules specifically designed for this type of
arbitration is elaborated.!°

The 1976 UNCITRAL Rules. Article 26 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
entitled “Interim Measures of Protection,” reads:

1. At the request of either party, the arbitral tribunal may take any interim measures
it deems necessary in respect of the subject-matter of the dispute, including measures
for the conservation of the goods forming the subject-matter in dispute, such as
ordering their deposit with a third person or the sale of perishable goods.

2. Such interim measures may be established in the form of an interim award. The
arbitral tribunal shall be entitled to require security for the costs of such measures.
3. A request for interim measures addressed by any party to a judicial authority
shall not be deemed incompatible with the agreement to arbitrate, or as a waiver of
that agreement.

While the 1976 version of Article 26 does not mention it, parties to UNCITRAL
proceedings can limit the scope of the tribunal’s power if they so wish. Article 26 was
adopted by the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal without modification. Hence, the jurispru-
dence of the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal is an important benchmark when analyzing the
power of an arbitral tribunal to grant interim relief under the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules
and provides good guidance in the application of the Rules.!!

Add.1, p. 12; Note by the Secretariat, 48th Session, New York, February 4-8, 2008, A/CN.9/
WG.II/WP.149, p. 8; Note by the Secretariat, 51th Session, Vienna, September 14—18, 2009,
A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.154/Add.1, pp. 7-10. For an alternative drafting proposal made by the
Government of Switzerland, see Note by the Secretariat of September 9, 2008, A/CN.9/WG.II/
WP.152 and Report on the work of its 50th Session, A/CN.9/669, pp. 19-20. See also the
alternative proposals suggested by Jan Paulsson and Georgios Petrochilos in “Revision of the
UNCITRAL Rules” presented at the ICCA in Dublin in June 2008, pp. 110-11.

8 See draft Article 1, Note by the Secretariat of August 6, 2008, A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.151.

9 Ibid.

10 See the conclusions reached by the UNCITRAL Working Group at its 48th Session, during
which it was decided that no specific provisions would be inserted in the revised Rules for
treaty-based arbitration and that the Working Group would “seek guidance from the Commission
on whether, after completion of its current work on the Rules, the Working Group should
consider in further depth the specificity of treaty-based arbitration and, if so, which form that
work should take” (Report of the 48th Session, A/CN.9/646, para. 69). Also in Report of the
50th Session, A/CN.9/669, para. 8.

11 + Although the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal applied Article 26, it must be noted that it placed great
emphasis on its inherent power to issue interim measures “as may be necessary to conserve the
respective rights of the Parties and to ensure that the tribunal’s jurisdiction and authority are
made fully effective.” For example, when the tribunal first addressed a request for interim

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 511

20-Yannaca-20.indd 511 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

The draft UNCITRAL Rules. The 2009 draft of Article 26 reads as follows”:

1. The arbitral tribunal may, at the request of a party, grant interim measures.

2. An interim measure is any temporary measure by which, at any time prior to the
issuance of the award by which the dispute is finally decided, the arbitral tribunal
orders a party to, including without limitation:

(a) Maintain or restore the status quo pending determination of the dispute;

(b) Take action that would prevent, or refrain from taking action that is likely to
cause, (i) current or imminent harm or (ii) prejudice to the arbitral process
itself;

(c) Provide a means of preserving assets out of which a subsequent award may
be satisfied; or

(d) Preserve evidence that may be relevant and material to the resolution of the
dispute.
3. The party requesting an interim measure under paragraph 2 (a), (b) and (c) shall
satisfy the arbitral tribunal that:

(a) Harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages is likely to result if
the measure is not ordered, and such harm substantially outweighs the harm that
is likely to result to the party against whom the measure is directed if the mea-
sure is granted; and

(b) There is a reasonable possibility that the requesting party will succeed on the
merits of the claim. The determination on this possibility shall not affect the
discretion of the arbitral tribunal in making any subsequent determination.

4. With regard to a request for an interim measure under paragraph 2 (d), the
requirements in paragraph 3 (a) and (b) shall apply only to the extent the arbitral
tribunal considers appropriate.

5. Nothing in these Rules shall have the effect of creating a right, or of limiting any
right which may exist outside these Rules, of a party to apply to the arbitral tribunal
for, and any power of the arbitral tribunal to issue, in either case without prior
notice to a party, a preliminary order that the party not frustrate the purpose of a
requested interim measure.

512

20-Yannaca-20.indd 512

relief, it based the measures it ordered not on Article 26 but on its inherent power. See GEORGE
H. Acpricu, THE JURISPRUDENCE OF THE IRAN-UNITED STATES CLAIMS TRIBUNAL 137-38 (Clarendon
Press 1996) [hereinafter G. Aldrich]. Also Rockwell International Systems Inc. and The Islamic
Republic of Iran, Ministry of Defence, Award No. ITM20-430-1 (June 6, 1983) at 4-5, reprinted
in 2 Iran-USCTR 369, 371 (1983-I); RCA Global Communications Disc, Inc. and The Islamic
Republic of Iran, Award No. ITM 30-160-1 (October 31, 1983) at 5, reprinted in 4 Iran-USCTR
9, 11-12 (1983-II). For a discussion on the inherent power of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal, see
also Davip Caron, THE IRAN-UNITED STATES CLAIMS TRIBUNAL AND THE INTERNATIONAL ARBITRAL
Process 216—23 (Leiden 1990) [hereinafter D. Caron, Leiden].

Note by the Secretariat, 48th Session, New York, February 4-8, 2008, A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.149,
pp. 7-8. Note by the Secretariat, 49th Session, Vienna, September 15-19, 2008, A/CN.9/
WG.II/WP.151/Add.1, pp. 8-9. At the 50th Session, it was suggested to place draft article 26
before the provisions on evidence, hearings and experts (Note A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.154.Add.1,
para. 23).

GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

6. The arbitral tribunal may modify, suspend or terminate an interim measure it has
granted, upon application of any party or, in exceptional circumstances and upon
prior notice to the parties, on the arbitral tribunal’s own initiative.

7. The arbitral tribunal may require the party requesting an interim measure to pro-
vide appropriate security in connection with the measure or the order.

8. The arbitral tribunal may require any party promptly to disclose any material
change in the circumstances on the basis of which the interim measure was requested
or granted.

9. The party requesting an interim measure shall be liable for any costs and damages
caused by the measure or the order to any party if the arbitral tribunal later deter-
mines that, in the circumstances, the measure or the order should not have been
granted. The arbitral tribunal may award such costs and damages at any point during
the proceedings.

10. A request for interim measures addressed by any party to a judicial authority
shall not be deemed incompatible with the agreement to arbitrate, or as a waiver of
that agreement.

Paragraphs 1 to 4 and 6 to 9 of draft Article 26 mirror the revised wording of the
Model Law. Paragraph 5, on temporary orders, contains a different wording and is sub-
ject to strong controversy.'? Paragraph 10 corresponds to the original text of Article 26(3),
which the Working Group agreed to retain.

Finally, the authority of a tribunal to order interim relief under the UNCITRAL
Rules is subject to any mandatory rules of the national law applicable to the arbitration.
The submission to the relevant national law is confirmed by Article 1(2) of the 1976
UNCITRAL Rules and of the draft Rules, which provides:

These rules shall govern the arbitration except that where any of these Rules is in
conflict with a provision of the law applicable to the arbitration from which the
parties cannot derogate, that provision shall prevail.

Thus, the power of a tribunal to grant interim relief depends on the /ex arbitri. It is
worth noting that some jurisdictions, such as Italy and Greece, reserve this power to
domestic courts.

Other Relevant Provisions

In addition to the preceding provisions referred to, one must consider the specific
provisions that a BIT, a MIT or even a free trade agreement may contain and which

13. _ In its 2008 version, para. 5 read: “If the arbitral tribunal determines that disclosure of a request
for an interim measure to the party against whom it is directed risks frustrating that measure’s
purpose, nothing in these Rules prevents the tribunal, when it gives notice of such request to
that party, from temporarily ordering that the party not frustrate the purpose of the requested
measure. The arbitral tribunal shall give that party the earliest practicable opportunity to present
its case and then determine whether to grant the request.” See Report A/CN.9/669, paras. 107
to 112 for the reasons underlying the change. Paragraph 5 might be placed immediately before
paragraph 10 (See Note A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.154.Add.1, para. 23.)

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 513

20-Yannaca-20.indd 513 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

may supplement and amend the applicable arbitration rules. For example, Article 1134
of the NAFTA prohibits attachment orders and orders that enjoin the application of the
challenged measures in the following terms:

A Tribunal may order an interim measure of protection to preserve the rights of a
disputing party, or to ensure that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is made fully effective,
including an order to preserve evidence in the possession or control of a disputing
party or to protect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. A Tribunal may not order attachment
or enjoin the application of the measure alleged to constitute a breach referred to in
Article 1116 [claim by an investor of a party on its own behalf claiming inter alia
for a breach of an obligation under section A (investment)] or 1117 [claim by an
investor of a party on behalf of an enterprise claiming inter alia for a breach of an
obligation under section A (investment)]. For purposes of this paragraph, an order
includes a recommendation.

For further examples, one may cite Article 10.20(8) of the United States-Peru Trade
Promotion Agreement signed on April 12, 2006, as well as Article 28 of the U.S.
Model BIT (2004), both of which contain wording similar to the NAFTA provision
just quoted. Another example may be found in the provisions of the Central America
Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), Article 10.20.8.'*

PURPOSE OF THE MEASURES: PRESERVING THE RESPECTIVE
RIGHTS OF THE PARTIES

Interim measures are temporary in nature and are traditionally intended to “preserve
the respective rights of the Parties pending the decision”? of a tribunal.

ICSID System

Article 47 of the ICSID Convention allows a tribunal to grant provisional measures “if
it considers that the circumstances so require [. . .] to preserve the respective rights of
either party.” Arbitration Rule 39(1) requires that the applicant specify in its request
the right(s) to be preserved. The AF Arbitration Rules also refer to the preservation of
the parties’ rights. Absent any further guidance, it is accepted that provisional mea-
sures in the ICSID system are left to the appreciation of each tribunal,'® provided that
they aim at the preservation of a right of a party. This begs the question of what rights

14 See, for an illustration, Railroad Development Corporation v. Guatemala, ICSID Case
No. ARB/07/23, Decision on Provisional Measures, October 15, 2008, in which the tribunal
denied the claimant’s request for interim measures to preserve certain documents.

15 Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. (United Kingdom v. Iran), Interim Protection Order, July 5, 1951, I.C.J.
Reports 1951, p. 93.

16 Pey Casado, para. 15.

514 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 514 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

can be preserved (which will be examined below) and whether the rights to be pre-
served are limited to the rights in dispute.'’ Few tribunals have addressed this issue.

The tribunal in Amco v. Indonesia‘'* concurred with Amco that the rights that can be
preserved are the rights in dispute. In that case, Indonesia requested that the claimant
take no action which “might aggravate the dispute” and abstain from “promoting,
stimulating or instigating the publication of propaganda presenting their case selec-
tively outside this tribunal or otherwise calculate[d] to discourage foreign investment
to Indonesia” following the publication of an article in a Hong Kong newspaper. The
tribunal found that the publication of the article did not do any actual harm nor aggra-
vate or exacerbate the legal dispute. Saying so, the tribunal noted that “no such right [in
dispute] could be threatened by the publication of articles like’’'® the one in dispute.

A restrictive approach of the notion of “right to be preserved” was later adopted in
Maffezini.”° In this case, the respondent requested that the claimant post a guarantee or
bond in the amount of the costs expected to be incurred in the arbitration. The tribunal
denied the request for two main reasons: one related to the existence of a right to be
preserved, a topic that will be addressed below, and the other was that the request did
not relate to the subject matter of the case before the tribunal, 1.¢., to the investment
made in Spain but that it related to separate or extraneous matters.”!

This restrictive approach has not been confirmed since and could be viewed as too
limitative. Indeed, the rights to be preserved ought not to be limited to the rights which
form the subject matter of the dispute on the merits. It is admitted that other rights
which relate to the dispute can also be protected, such as procedural rights”? or the
more general right to the non aggravation of the dispute. The applicable criterion 1s
thus that the right to be preserved bears a relation with the dispute. This latter approach
was adopted by the Plama tribunal:

The rights to be preserved must relate to the requesting party’s ability to have its
claims and requests for relief in the arbitration fairly considered and decided by the
arbitral tribunal and for any arbitral decision which grants to the Claimant the relief

17 For the ICJ, the rights to be preserved are the rights which are the subject of dispute in the
proceedings (see Great Passage Belt Case mentioned below). In the Arbitral Award of July 31,
1989 Case (Guinea-Bissau v. Senegal) which concerned the validity of a previously rendered
arbitral award on the determination of a maritime boundary, the Court dismissed a request for
provisional measures that the parties refrain from all acts in the disputed maritime territory that
was the subject of the arbitral award at stake but not of the ICJ proceedings (1990 I.C.J. Reports,
pp. 69-70, Order, March 2, 1990).

ig Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1,
Decision on Request for Provisional Measures, December 9, 1983, para. 1, ICSID Reports
1993, p. 410 [hereinafter Amco].

19 Amco, para. 3.

20 Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision on
Request for Provisional Measures, October 28, 1999, para. 10 [hereinafter Maffezini].

21. = Maffezini, para. 23.

22 See Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case
No. ARB/05/22, Procedural Order No. 1, March 31, 2006 [hereinafter Biwater], which stated:
“The type of rights capable of protection by means of provisional measures are not only
substantive rights but also procedural rights,” para. 71.

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 515

20-Yannaca-20.indd 515 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

it seeks to be effective and able to be carried out. Thus the rights to be preserved by
provisional measures are circumscribed by the requesting party’s claims and
requests for relief. They may be general rights, such as the rights to due process or
the right not to have the dispute aggravated, but those general rights must be related
to the specific disputes in arbitration, which, in turn, are defined by the Claimant’s
claims and requests for relief to date.”

In Plama, the rights relating to the dispute were the rights deriving from the Energy
Charter Treaty, to wit, Plama’s rights to fair, equitable, and nondiscriminatory treat-
ment for its investment. The tribunal observed that Plama’s claims and requests for
relief were limited to damages under the Energy Charter Treaty. It concluded that “the
scope of the ‘rights relating to this dispute’ which deserve protection by provisional
measures is necessarily limited to the damage claims.”** On that basis, the tribunal did
not see how local proceedings, the stay of which was requested, could affect the ICSID
arbitration. Whatever the fate of the local proceedings, Plama could still pursue its
claims for damages before the ICSID tribunal.

A similar approach was adopted in Burlington v. Ecuador’ in which the tribunal
stated:

In the Tribunal’s view, the rights to be preserved by provisional measures are not
limited to those which form the subject-matter of the dispute or substantive rights
as referred to by the Respondents, but may extend to procedural rights, including
the general right to the status quo and to the non-aggravation of the dispute. These
latter rights are thus self-standing rights.

The rights to be preserved thus do not need to be the rights in dispute but must relate
to the dispute as it is defined by the claims and the relief sought.

NAFTA Proceedings

NAFTA Article 1134, already quoted, provides for interim relief to preserve the rights
of a disputing party. However, in contrast to the ICSID system, it makes it clear that
the rights in dispute cannot be the subject matter of the provisional measures. The
reason for this appears to be that “Articles 1134 and 1135 permit a state to implement
and maintain a measure even if it breaches substantive rights contained in Chapter 11A.
Thereafter, even if restitution is ordered, a State Party may choose to pay monetary
damages instead.’”° In proceedings conducted in accordance with the AF Arbitration
Rules as modified by the provisions of NAFTA, Chapter 11, Section B, a tribunal

23 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Order,
September 6, 2005, para. 40 (emphasis added) [hereinafter Plama].

24 ~=Plama, para. 41.

25 Burlington Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petrdéleos
del Ecuador (PetroEcuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Procedural Order No. 1 on Burlington
Oriente’s Request for Provisional Measures, June 29, 2009, para. 60 [hereinafter Burlington].

26 Henri Alvarez, Arbitration under the North American Free Trade Agreement, 16(4) ARB. INT’L
417 (2000).

516 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 516 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

rejected a request for ordering the respondent to cease and desist from any interference
with the claimant’s property whether by embargo or by any other means. The tribunal
considered that an order in the terms requested by the claimant would not be consistent
with the limitations imposed by Article 1134 “since such an order would entail an
injunction of the application of the measures which in this case are alleged to constitute
a breach referred to in NAFTA Article 1117.’

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

The revision on the UNCITRAL Rules will bring significant changes as to the purpose
for which a tribunal may grant interim measures.

The 1976 UNCITRAL Rules. The heading of Article 26 of the 1976 UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules reads “Interim Measures of Protection.” The text, however, merely
relates to “measures [the tribunal] deems necessary in respect of the subject-matter of
the dispute, including measures for the conservation of the goods forming the subject-
matter in dispute, such as ordering their deposit with a third person or the sale of
perishable goods.” This text, which elicited discussions over the years, has generally
been understood not to restrict the power of the arbitral tribunal to order any type of
interim measure it deemed appropriate.”* According to leading authors, Article 26(1)
should not be seen as an exhaustive list and was only meant to give examples.” In
other words, measures could aim at any type of protection as long as it is necessary.

The practice of the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal is of limited interest in this respect,
given the commercial nature of many of the cases and the numerous applications to
stay duplicative proceedings. In addition to the stay of proceedings, measures ordered
have dealt with the conservation of goods,*’ the prohibition of the sale of goods, and
the return of goods.*!

The draft Rules. Article 17(1) of the Model Law was originally drafted against the
background of Article 26 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. It was modified

27. Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1,
Procedural Order No. 2 concerning request for provisional measures and the schedule of the
proceeding, May 3, 2000, http://www.economia-snci.gob.mx/sphp_pages/importa/sol_contro/
consultoria/Casos_Mexico/Marvin/ordenes/Order_2.pdf. Also in Mec N. Kinnear, ANDREA K.
BJORKLUND, JOHN F, G. HANNAFORD INVESTMENT DispuTES UNDER NAFTA, AN ANNOTATED GUIDE
TO NAFTA Cuapter 11, at 8-1134 (Kluwer) [hereinafter M. Kinnear et al.] who also refer to Pope
& Talbot Inc. v. Canada (UNCITRAL), Award on Interim Measures Motion, January 7, 2000.

28 UNCITRAL Working Group, Doc. A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.119—Settlement of commercial
disputes—Preparation of uniform provisions on interim measures of protection, para. 41.

29 Davip Caron, LEE CAPLAN, MAtTTI PELLONPAA, THE UNCITRAL ArsirRaTION RULES, A COMMEN-
TARY 539 (OUP 2006) [hereinafter Caron et al.].

30 ~—E.g., Behring International, Inc. and the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force et al., Interim Award
No. 46-382-3 (February 22, 1985), reprinted in 8 Iran-USCTR 44 [hereinafter Behring
International].

31 See G. Aldrich, pp. 151-55.

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 517

20-Yannaca-20.indd 517 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

in 2006 to provide a generic definition of interim measure. Article 17(1) of the Model
Law now reads, “[uJnless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal may, at
the request of a party, grant interim measures”. Observing that the ICC or the AAA
Arbitration Rules gave a broader discretion to the arbitrators and did not make any
reference to the subject matter of the dispute, the UNCITRAL Working Group deleted
such reference expressly in the Model Law and listed the different purposes of a
measure, namely, maintaining or restoring the status quo pending determination of the
dispute; taking action that would prevent; or refraining from taking action that is likely
to cause current or imminent harm or prejudice to the arbitral process itself, providing
a means of preserving assets out of which a subsequent award may be satisfied or
preserving evidence that may be relevant and material to the resolution of the dispute.

Draft Article 26 further confirms this evolution. The heading only reads “Interim
Measures,” and the text contains the same generic wording as Article 17(1) of the
Model Law to the effect that the “tribunal may grant intertm measures.” Thus, there is
no specific limitation set to the general power of a tribunal to grant interim measures
awarded under draft Article 26(1) in terms of scope of the measure or rights to be pro-
tected. A close look at the various revised drafts shows that draft Article 26(2) could
have been construed to contain an exhaustive list of interim measures. In the context
of the revision of the Model Law, which contains the same list, the Working Group
considered that “to the extent that all the purposes for interim measures were generi-
cally covered by the revised list contained in paragraph (2), it was no longer necessary
to make that list non-exhaustive.”*” The list contained in Article 17(2) of the Model
Law and in draft Article 26(2) of the Rules has been described as “reasonably accu-
rately reflect[ing] reality in that it lists the types of intertm measures most commonly
requested.”*? However, to avoid any doubt, the terms “including, without limitation”
were added in paragraph 2 of draft Article 26 at the Fiftieth Session. This made clear
that the list contained therein is non exclusive and that the definition of interim
measures is to be construed widely.**

TYPES OF MEASURES

In practice, it can be said that measures can be granted in order to (1) preserve the right
of a party which is the subject matter of the dispute, (11) maintain or restore the status
quo, (iii) protect the jurisdiction of the tribunal, (iv) preserve evidence, and (v) prevent
the frustration of the forthcoming award.*

32. ~—Report of the Working Group on the work of its 39th Session, A/CN.9/545, para. 21.

33. Kaj Hobér, /nterim Measures by Arbitrators, \CCA Congress series No. 13, International
Arbitration 2006: Back to Basics?, p. 734 [hereinafter K. Hobér].

34 Report A/CN.9/669, paras. 92-94, Note A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.154.Add.1, para. 25.

35 For the protection of the confidentiality of ICSID proceedings, see ScHREUER ET AL.,
paras. 148-51 and Loretta Malintoppi, Provisional Measures in Recent ICSID Proceedings:
What Parties request and What Tribunals Order, in INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT LAW FOR THE
21st CENTURY, Essays IN HONOUR OF CHRISTOPH SCHREUER 170-71 (OUP 2009).

518 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 518 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

Preservation of a Right

A party may seek to preserve a right to which it claims to be entitled. In this respect, two
closely connected questions of procedure arise, 1.e., whether the applicant must prove
that the right exists and whether a prima facie case on the merits must be shown. The
latter question will be discussed below in the more general discussion of the require-
ments to obtain interim relief. The former one is reviewed in the following paragraphs.

ICSID system. In Maffezini, Spain requested the posting of a bond to protect its alleged
right to obtain reimbursement of its legal costs in the event that the claimant failed in
its case, and the tribunal ordered it to pay the costs. In its analysis, the Maffezini tribu-
nal stated that, under Arbitration Rule 39, the “rights must exist at the time of the
request, must not be hypothetical, nor are ones to be created in the future.”*° As an
example of an existing right, the tribunal cited an interest in a piece of property, the
ownership of which is in dispute.*’ It concluded that Spain’s alleged right was hypo-
thetical and could thus not be protected. Indeed, “[e]xpectations of success or failure
in an arbitration or judicial case are conjectures.”** Accordingly, protecting a right that
did not exist at the time of the order would have preyudged the merits of the case in an
undue manner. Similarly in an unreported case, a tribunal, referring to Maffezini,
observed that ordering the requested provisional measures, namely security for costs,
would constitute a preyudgment of the underlying rights and obligations in a case that
had not been yet heard, resulting in a denial of justice for the claimants.

Other ICSID tribunals have also sought to clarify this issue. The tribunal in Pey
Casado elaborated on whether a right must exist to be protected. It noted that the
tribunal must reason on the basis of assumptions and that “[iJ]t results from the very
nature of this mechanism that the tribunal cannot require [. . .] evidence of the exis-
tence, the reality or the present nature of the rights which the measure sought aims to
safeguard or preserve.”*” In addition, to demand that the right that one seeks to pre-
serve must be existing would oblige the tribunal to prejudge the substance of the case
at a time when it is not in a position to do so.” Such prejudgment is not required under
the ICSID Convention*! and is contrary to the very nature of provisional remedies,
which by essence can only assess the likelihood of the rights at issue.

This approach was further validated by the Occidental tribunal with respect to a
request for an order for specific performance.” The tribunal held that the right to be

36 © Maffezini, para. 13.

37 ~—sCTbid., para. 14.

38 ~—s Tbid., para. 20.

39 Pey Casado, para. 46 (italics in the original).

40 Ibid., para. 48, referring to the ICJ case of LaGrand (discussed below) in para. 49.

41 [bid., para. 45.

42 Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v.
Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Provisional Measures, August 17,
2007 [hereinafter Occidental]. In this case, a participation contract was entered into by Occidental
Exploration Petroleum Company (OEPC), Ecuador and Petroecuador, a State-owned petroleum
company in connection with the exclusive exploration and exploitation of oil. After the State’s

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 519

20-Yannaca-20.indd 519 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

preserved need not be proven to exist in fact. It is sufficient that it be asserted as “a
theoretically existing right,” the tribunal only dealing with the nature of the right and
not its merits.* A theoretically existing right was defined as “‘an actual right or legally
protected interest, by opposition to a simple interest which does not entail legal
protection.”* The tribunal then further found that, at the stage of the request, the
claimants had not established that “there exists a right to specific performance where a
natural resources concession agreement has been terminated or cancelled by a sover-
eign State.’’* It thus examined the existence of a right in theory. For that purpose, it
reviewed whether a principle of law existed providing for a right to specific perfor-
mance in petroleum contracts. It concluded that such a right did not exist.

By contrast, the tribunal in City Oriente concluded that the clarmant had proven the
appearance of a right, namely that under Ecuadorian Law, a contractor may demand
that the public entity it contracted with be ordered to fulfill its commitments, while
making sure it distinguished the facts of the case from the Occidental case.*’ In doing
so, it observed that “at this stage, the sole decision to be made by the Arbitral Tribunal
is whether the party requesting the provisional measures, City Oriente, has been able
to prove fumus boni iuris, an appearance of a good right.’“* The same finding of an
appearance of a contractual right to specific performance under national law was also
made in Burlington.”

It is also worth noting that some ICSID tribunals have taken a stricter approach and
refused to grant a relief that would coincide with the final remedy sought. In TANESCO,”
the respondent applied for the payment by the claimant of a sum allegedly due under
the disputed contract, 1.e., for specific performance. It argued that, absent a payment,
there was a risk that its lenders would foreclose on the facility, which could have

nullification of the contract, OEPC and its mother company (Occidental Petroleum Company)
initiated an ICSID proceeding under the U.S.-Ecuador BIT alleging that their exploration
rights had been illegally nullified and their assets had been expropriated. The claimants
requested that the tribunal order the respondents (i) to invest a minimum amount in the devel-
opment and operation of the area; (ii) to give a notice prior to entering into a contract with
another party to carry out exploration and exploitation activities in the area; (iii) to produce
reports regarding production and expenditures and; (iv) to enter into a contract with the claim-
ants for the shipment of a certain amount of barrels of crude oil. The claimants presented their
request as necessary to preserve their rights to obtain specific performance and restoration of
their rights. The request was rejected.

43 Occidental, para. 64.

44 Occidental, para. 64.

45 Occidental, para. 65.

46  Ibid., para. 86.

47 Among those, was the fact that the claim in Occidental was based on a BIT, while City Oriente
requested the performance of a contract subject to Ecuadorian law.

48 City Oriente. Limited v. The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador
(PetroEcuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Revocation of Provisional Measures
and Other Procedural Matters, May 13, 2008, para. 45 [hereinafter City Oriente].

49 Burlington, paras. 70-71.

50. Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited (TANESCO) v. Independent Power Tanzania
Limited, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/8, Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional
Measures (Appendix A to the Award), December 20, 1999.

520 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 520 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

resulted in the deprivation of the ownership of the facility. The tribunal noted that the
right to be preserved in that case was the right to enjoy the benefit of the agreement.
The tribunal observed:

We do not go as far as to conclude that “provisional measures” under Rule 39 can
never include recommending the performance of a contract in whole or in part: it is
not necessary for us to go that far. But where what is sought, is, in effect, perfor-
mance of the Agreement, and where the only right said to be preserved thereby is the
right to enjoy the benefits of that Agreement, we consider that the application falls
outside the scope of Rule 39, and therefore is beyond our jurisdiction to grant.*!

In the same spirit, the Phoenix tribunal recalled that the “[p]rovisional measures are
indeed not deemed to give to the party requesting them more rights than it ever
possessed and has title to claim.’’”” It concluded that “the requested provisional measure
concerning the ownership of the land cannot be granted as it is equivalent to the final
result sought.”

UNCITRAL Rules. A request to preserve a right most often aims at maintaining or
restoring the status quo. In spite of this, it does not appear that the existence of the right
which is the subject matter of the measure has been discussed as such by UNCITRAL
tribunals. It probably has been addressed in the more general discussion as to whether
a prima facie case on the merits is necessary, which will be examined below.

Finally, one should note that the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal has been reluctant to
grant interim relief tantamount to the final relief requested.°**

Preservation of the Status Quo /Non aggravation of the Dispute

ICSID system. The travaux préparatoires of the ICSID Convention referred to the
need “to preserve the status quo between the parties pending [the] final decision on

51 Para. 16 (emphasis in the original). The respondent’s position was found to be too speculative
as the risk of foreclosure was not supported and TANESCO’s alleged incapacity to face a pos-
sible award for costs was uncertain. For the tribunal, there was “a distinction to be drawn
between the protection of rights and the enforcement of rights”, para. 13. It further noted that
ICSID interim measures should not be recommended “in order, in effect, to give security for
the claim”, para. 14, referring to Atlantic Triton v. Guinea. It found that rather than preserving
the status quo, the respondent’s request was “plainly directed to affect a fundamental change
to it”, para. 15.

52. Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Decision on Provisional
Measures, April 6, 2007, para. 37 [hereinafter Phoenix].

53. Ibid.

54 See Behring International, Where Chamber three stated: “The Tribunal, however, determines
that the granting of the full interim relief requested by Respondents, in particular, the transfer
to Respondents of possession, custody and control of the warehoused goods (Respondent’s
title to which is not disputed by Claimant), would be tantamount to awarding Respondents the
final relief sought in their counterclaim. The Tribunal decides that, under the circumstances of
this particular case, it cannot award such relief prior to determining as a final matter that is has
jurisdiction.” para. 3.

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 521

20-Yannaca-20.indd 521 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

the merits.” This expression has not been widely embraced by ICSID tribunals which,
rather, refer to the non aggravation of the dispute. This is a principle of international
law well embedded since the case of the Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgaria.»
The commentary of the 1968 edition of the ICSID Arbitration Rules stated that the non
aggravation of the dispute was a valid concern. It explained that Article 47 of the
Convention “is based on the principle that once a dispute is submitted to arbitration
the parties should not take steps that might aggravate or extend their dispute or preju-
dice the execution of the award.”°°

The principle was first affirmed in the first ICSID case Holiday Inns v. Morocco*’
and reiterated in Amco v. Indonesia. In the latter case, the tribunal acknowledged “the
good and fair practical rule, according to which both Parties to a legal dispute should
refrain, in their own interest, to do anything that could aggravate or exacerbate the
same, thus rendering its solution possibly more difficult.”°*

It was reaffirmed in Pey Casado. The tribunal had to decide whether there existed a
risk of aggravation or extension of the dispute “or of a development likely to make the
execution of an eventual judgment more difficult (in the hypothesis, again, that the
tribunal recognises itself as having jurisdiction) and in consequence a compromise of
the rights recognised therein for one or other of the Parties.”*? The tribunal acknowl-
edged that there were tensions between the parties and thus invited them, under the
heading of a provisional measure, to take into account the various possible hypotheses
and each to ensure—to reproduce the expression used by the International Court of
Justice in the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company Case—“that no action is taken which might
prejudice the rights of the other Party in respect of the carrying out of [the judgment]
which the [Arbitration Tribunal] may subsequently render” and “that no action of any
kind is taken which might aggravate or extend the dispute.”

The Plama tribunal adopted a somewhat more limited approach. While acknowl-
edging that the local proceedings which the claimant sought to discontinue could
aggravate the dispute between the parties, it considered,

that the right to non-aggravation of the dispute refers to actions which would make
resolution of the dispute by the Tribunal more difficult. It is a right to maintenance
of the status quo, when a change of circumstances threatens the ability of the
Arbitral Tribunal to grant the relief which a party seeks and the capability of giving
effect to the relief.!

55 Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgaria (Belgium v. Bulgaria), Judgment of December 5,
1939, P.C.I.J. series A/B, No 79, p. 199. See also LaGrand Case (Germany v. United States),
Judgment of June 27, 2001, para. 103, I.C.J. Reports 2001, p. 466 [hereinafter LaGrand Case].

56 1 ICSID Reports 99.

57. Holiday Inns S.A. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/72/1, Order of
July 2, 1972, not public but commented in Pierre Lalive, The First “World Bank” Arbitration
(Holiday Inns v. Morocco—Some Legal Problems, BYIL 1980 [hereinafter P. Lalive].

58 Amco, p. 412.

59 Pey Casado, para. 73.

60  Ibid., para. 77.

61 Plama, para. 45.

522 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 522 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

In that case, as already mentioned, the resolution of the dispute was to be effected
through monetary relief. In other words, the resolution was not rendered more difficult
by the alleged action of the respondent. This approach of the non aggravation of the
dispute mirrors the tribunal’s vision of the rights to be preserved examined above. On
that basis, an aggravation of a dispute, the consequences of which could be compen-
sated by an award of monetary damages, might not be deemed a sufficient ground for
granting interim relief. This aspect will be discussed further below in the context of the
requirement of irreparable harm.

The Occidental tribunal appears to have confirmed this approach. It recalled that
when granted, provisional measures have always been directed at the behavior of the
parties to the dispute and that “[p]rovisional measures are not designed to merely
mitigate the final amount of damages.” The tribunal held that the measures requested
aimed at the non aggravation of the monetary damages but not of the dispute per se.™
The Burlington tribunal adopted a somewhat different approach. It considered that the
continuation of the seizures was bound to aggravate the dispute, because there was “a
risk that the relationship between the foreign investor and Ecuador may come to an
end.”4 In other words, it held that the continuation of the contractual cooperation
between the parties represented the status quo to be protected.©

UNCITRAL Rules. It is clear that the non aggravation of the dispute can be a ground
to obtain interim relief under the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules. The maintenance or restora-
tion of the status quo also appears in draft Article 26(2)(a) as an explicit ground for
granting interim relief.

It is interesting to note that the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal does not appear to have
relied on the concept of non aggravation of the dispute when assessing requests for
interim relief. However, references to maintaining the status quo can be found in con-
curring opinions.”

Protection of the Tribunal’s Jurisdiction

The ICSID Convention, the ICSID, AF, and UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules are silent
as to whether interim relief can be used for the purpose of protecting the tribunal’s

62 Occidental, para. 97. In addition, the Occidental tribunal observed “[I]n any situation resulting
from an illegal act, the mere passage of time aggravates the damages that can be ultimately
granted and it is well known that this is not a sufficient basis for ordering provisional measures,”
para. 97.

63 ~—Ibid., para. 98.

64 Burlington, para. 65. In that case, PetroEcuador initiated local proceedings to collect amounts
allegedly due under an amendment to the Hydrocarbon Act, which the claimants considered to
unilaterally modify their rights under two production sharing contracts for the exploration and
exploitation of oil fields in the Amazon Region.

65 —_ [bid., para. 67.

66 See concurring opinion of Judge Holtzmann and Judge Mosk to the interim award rendered in
E-systems v. The Islamic Republic of Iran and Bank Melli (February 4, 1983), reprinted in 2
Iran-USCTR 51 [hereinafter E-systems].

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 523

20-Yannaca-20.indd 523 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

jurisdiction, while NAFTA 1134, for example, specifically mentions this purpose as a
reason for interim relief. This said, it is accepted that this is one of the purposes of
interim relief.

ICSID Convention cases. Article 26 of the ICSID Convention provides that ICSID
proceedings are of an exclusive nature.®’ On that basis, tribunals have been asked to
enjoin parties from seeking interim relief in domestic courts or continuing proceedings
on the merits in another forum.

In Atlantic Triton, the ICSID tribunal was reluctant to affirm that, pursuant to
Article 26 of the ICSID Convention, the parties should refrain from preserving their
rights by filing action in domestic courts. By contrast, the tribunal in MINE v. Guinea
recommended that Guinea terminate any proceedings in connection with the dispute
and any provisional measures pending in national courts. ©

In SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Pakistan, the tribunal was presented with
a request for provisional measures, including the stay of a concurrent arbitration pro-
ceeding in Pakistan. The tribunal first found that SGS had “a prima facie right to seek
access to international adjudication under the ICSID Convention.”” It considered that
it was its duty to protect this right of access. It thus recommended that Pakistan inform
all the relevant domestic courts of the current standing of the ICSID arbitration and
ensure that no action be taken to hold SGS in contempt of court. In parallel, the tribu-
nal also recommended that local arbitration proceedings be stayed until the tribunal
decided on its jurisdiction.”’ By contrast, it rejected a broad request aiming at an injunc-
tion refraining from commencing or participating in proceedings relating in any manner
to the ICSID arbitration. This request was deemed to restrain the ordinary exercise of
Pakistan’s normal process of justice.”

In Tokios Tokeles, the tribunal also addressed Article 26 of the ICSID Convention
in the context of provisional measures. It stated that “[a]mong the rights that may be
protected by provisional measures is the right guaranteed by Article 26 to have the

67. See Charles N. Brower & Ronald E.M. Goodman, Provisional Measures and the Protection of
ICSID Jurisdictional Exclusivity against Municipal Proceedings, 6 ICSID Rev.—FILJ (1991)
[hereinafter C. Brower and R. Goodman].

68 Atlantic Triton Company Limited v. People’s Revolutionary Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case
No. ARB/84/1, decision unreported, [hereinafter Atlantic Triton] cited in Paul Friedland,
Provisional Measures and ICSID Arbitration, 2(4) Ars. Int’L 347 (1986) [hereinafter P.
Friedland].

69 Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case
No. ARB/84/4, Decision on Provisional Measures, December 4, 1985 [hereinafter MINE]. For
an analysis of Atlantic Triton and MINE, see P. Friedland, pp. 335-57 and also in JCSID and
Court-Ordered Provisional Measures Remedies: An Update, 4(2) Ars. Int’L 161-65 (1988);
see also Antonio R. Parra, The Practices and Experience of the ICSID, in ICC BuL.etin 37,
1993, No. 519, [hereinafter A. Parra], and C. Brower and R. Goodman.

70 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case
No. ARB/O1/13, Procedural Order No 2, October 16, 2002, 18 ICSID Rev.—FILJ (2003),
p. 299 [hereinafter SGS v. Pakistan].

71 Ibid., p. 304.

722 ~~ Ibid., p. 301.

524 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 524 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

ICSID Arbitration be the exclusive remedy for the dispute to the exclusion of any other
remedy [. . .].”’”? On that basis, the tribunal had already decided in relation to an earlier
application that once the parties had consented to ICSID arbitration, they were under a
duty to refrain from initiating or pursuing proceedings in any other forum in respect of
the subject matter of the dispute before ICSID. Accordingly, the tribunal recommended
in its first procedural order that both parties refrain from, suspend, or discontinue any
judicial or other domestic proceedings concerning Tokios Tokeles or its investment in
Ukraine which may affect the issuance or enforcement of a future award or aggravate
the dispute.’

In CSOB vy. Slovak Republic, the tribunal also recommended that the local bank-
ruptcy proceedings be suspended as they could have included determinations on issues
at stake in the ICSID arbitration.”° Similarly, the Holiday Inns tribunal” considered that
the Moroccan courts were to refrain from making decisions until it had itself decided
the questions in dispute, although no interim measure was recommended as such.

More recently, the Perenco tribunal recommended that Ecuador refrain from pursu-
ing any actions before local courts.” In its words,

[uJnless and until the Tribunal rules that it has no jurisdiction to entertain this
dispute, if its jurisdiction is hereafter challenged, or the Tribunal delivers a final
award on the merits, none of the parties may resort to the domestic courts of Ecuador
to enforce or resist any claim or right which forms part of the subject matter of this
arbitration.”

AF cases. In cases governed by the AF Rules, Article 26 of the Convention does not
apply. Nevertheless, an AF tribunal could very well consider that there is a necessity
to protect its jurisdiction under the circumstances. This is certainly beyond doubt in
AF NAFTA proceedings since NAFTA Article 1134 expressly provides for interim
relief to preserve the tribunal’s jurisdiction.

UNCITRAL Rules. Most of the interim relief granted by the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal
concerned stays of proceedings brought in other fora pending the tribunal’s determina-
tion. In doing so, the tribunal sought to ensure that its jurisdiction and authority were

73. Tokios Tokeles v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18 [hereinafter Tokios Tokeles], Procedural
Order No. 3, January 18, 2005, para. 7. For a similar position, see Burlington, para. 57.

74 ~~ Ibid., Procedural Order No. 1, July 1, 2003.

75  Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka a.s. v. Slovak Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Orders
No. 4 and No. 5, January 11, 1999 and March 1, 2000. See also Plama, where the tribunal
dismissed the claimant’s request to discontinue local proceedings and noted that, at least with
regard to local bankruptcy proceedings, the parties were not the same since the proceedings
were brought by private parties and not by the state, see infra.

76 Holiday Inns v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/72/1, Order of July 2, 1972,
quoted in Pey Casado, para. 54

77. Perenco Ecuador Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador
(PetroEcuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/08/16, Decision on Provisional Measures, May 8, 2009,
para. 62 [hereinafter Perenco]. That case arose under the same factual circumstances as
Burlington, 1.e., the amendment by Ecuador of its Hydrocarbon Act.

78 ~ Ibid., para. 61.

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 525

20-Yannaca-20.indd 525 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

fully effective,” notwithstanding the silence of the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules.

The Claims Settlement Declaration provided in Article VI (2) that the claims
referred to the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal were excluded from the jurisdiction of the
courts of Iran, of the United States, or any other courts. Stays decided by the tribunal
were contingent upon a showing that the parties were identical or closely related in
both proceedings and that the same subject matter was involved.®° The latter require-
ment was interpreted as implying that the two proceedings presented common issues
of law and facts currently or in the future without requiring an identity of claims, the
main concern of the tribunal being to avoid inconsistent decisions. However, the mere
exclusive jurisdiction of the tribunal was not deemed a sufficient ground for prevent-
ing a similar claim from being filed in another forum.*! Indeed, the tribunal was
cautious to preserve rights which might otherwise have been time-barred.

Draft Article 26(2)(b) also allows interim measures to prevent a party from taking
action that is likely to cause current or imminent harm or prejudice to the arbitral
process itself. This wording was meant to encompass preserving the jurisdiction of the
tribunal through anti-suit injunctions. However, because they infringe upon the princi-
ple of the competence-competence of courts and tribunals, which is a general principle
of procedure, anti-suit (and anti-arbitration) injunctions by an arbitral tribunal should
only be granted to prevent grossly abusive conduct. The same should hold true for
anti-arbitration injunctions issued by courts.

Preserving Evidence
Interim relief can aim at preserving evidence. The same purpose could in reality also

be achieved in reliance on the general procedural powers of a tribunal, for example
under Article 44 of the ICSID Convention.

79 See, for example, E-Systems; Rockwell International Systems Inc. and The Islamic Republic of
Iran, Ministry of Defence, Interim Award No. 20-430-1, June 6, 1983, reprinted in 2 TRAN-
USCTR 369.

80 CHARLES N. Brower & Jason D, BRUESCHKE, THE IRAN-UNITED STATES CLAIMS TRIBUNAL 231-32
(Martinus Nijhoff Publishers 1998) [hereinafter C. Brower]. See, e.g., RCA Global
Communications Disc., Inc. and the Islamic Republic of Iran, Interim Award No. 30-160-1,
October 31, 1983, reprinted in 4 IRAN-USCTR 9.

81 C. Brower, p. 234. Also Fluor Corporation and The Islamic Republic of Iran, Interim Award
No. 162-333-1, para. 6 (August 6, 1986), reprinted in 11 IRAN-USCTR 296, wherein the request
to enjoin claimant from instituting an ICC proceedings was denied especially since substantial
questions as to the jurisdiction of the tribunal existed and given the fact that the “filing else-
where might be necessary to preserve rights which might otherwise be time-barred” (at 297).
The claimant had also undertaken to commence the arbitration but not to pursue it. For a detailed
analysis of the stay of proceedings granted by the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal, see G. Aldrich,
pp. 142-49.

82 Nottebohm Case (Liechtenstein v. Guatemala), Preliminary Objections, Judgement of
November 18, 1953, I.C.J. Reports 1953, pp. 119-20.

526 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 526 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

ICSID system. ICSID tribunals have granted measures aiming at the protection of
evidence. The Biwater tribunal, for example, recommended that the respondent pre-
serve certain documents and make an inventory of given categories of documents.® In
a previous case, Agip v. Congo,™ the tribunal had granted the claimant’s request for
measures requiring the government to collect all the documents that had been kept at
Agip’s local office, furnish a complete list of these documents to the tribunal, and keep
them available for presentation to the tribunal at Agip’s request. In another case,
Vacuum Salt v. Ghana,* the claimant sought an order to preserve its corporate records.
The government gave a voluntary undertaking that it would not deny the claimant’s
access to its records, which was acknowledged by the tribunal.

UNCITRAL Rules. The need to protect evidence that is relevant and material to the
resolution of the dispute is one of the grounds on which an UNCITRAL tribunal may
grant interim measures under draft Article 26(2)(d). The draft requirements for an
interim measure aimed at preserving evidence are less stringent than those for interim
relief with other purposes, which will be discussed. Indeed, the tribunal would appreciate
in its discretion to what extent the applicant needs to show a reasonable likelihood of
success on the merits. Similarly, it 1s only if the tribunal would consider it appropriate
that the applicant would need to show that “harm not adequately reparable by an award
of damages” would be likely to result if the measure is not ordered.

Non-Frustration of the Award

Can interim measures be used to preserve assets out of which a subsequent award may
be satisfied or to guarantee the payment of an award?

ICSID system. ICSID tribunals have been reluctant to acknowledge that the avoid-
ance of the frustration of the award can be a valid purpose of provisional measures.
This purpose has mainly been discussed in the context of requests for security to cover

83  Biwater, paras. 84 to 98. The applicant was also seeking the production of various categories
of documents. The Biwater tribunal noted that “actual production is catered for by other rules
(in particular Article 43 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 34 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules)”,
para. 100. It concluded “[a]lthough there may be instances in which document production
could be ordered pursuant to Article 47, this would in the Arbitral Tribunal’s view be excep-
tional”, para. 101. In that particular instance, it found that the requirements of Article 47 were
not established and that there was no right threatened, but went on to examine the request pur-
suant to Article 43 of the Convention. The Phoenix tribunal also declined to grant a provisional
measure related to the opening of secret services archives under Article 47 of the Convention
as the request appeared overly broad and unspecific and could be dealt with under Article 43 if
needed, see para. 46.

84  Agip SpA v. People’s Republic of Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/77/1, Decision, January 18, 1979,
reported in the Award of November 30, 1979, 1 ICSID Reports 310 [hereinafter Agip v. Congo].

85 Vacuum Salt Products Limited v. Government of the Republic of Ghana, ICSID Case
No. ARB/92/1, Decision No. 3 on request for recommendation of provisional measures, June 14,
1993, 4 ICSID Reports 323.

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 527

20-Yannaca-20.indd 527 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

the amount in dispute or the legal costs. In Atlantic Triton, it was decided that such a
request for security for the amount of the claim fell within the ambit of Article 47 of
the Convention.® The tribunal, however, rejected the request on the grounds that “there
is no reason to suppose that the Government of Guinea would not perform any obliga-
tions for which the final award might hold it responsible.”*’

All other requests for security for costs presented to ICSID tribunals appear to have
been denied or granted upon stringent conditions. In Maffezini v. Spain, the tribunal
dismissed the request for security for the two main reasons already explained, 1.e., the
non existence of a right to be preserved and the fact that the request was not linked to
the subject matter of the case. In Pey Casado, the respondent applied for a guarantee
of the payment of the costs. The tribunal considered that granting a cautio judicatum
solvi for the payment of costs was not an ordinary measure® and that the circumstances
did not justify an extraordinary one. It noted that such a measure was not mentioned in
the ICSID texts, which entailed “a certain presumption that such a measure is not
authorized or included,”*® and deduced that the drafters of the Convention appeared to
have evaluated and accepted the risk of non payment of a party’s allocated costs.”

It is submitted that an order for security for costs in favor of the respondent should
only be granted if the claimant’s case appears abusive, frivolous, or extravagant.

UNCITRAL Rules. It has been argued that Article 26 in its 1976 version did not allow
orders for security for costs because such orders were not made in respect of the sub-
ject matter of the dispute.’! This opinion is too restrictive and, in any event, appears
obsolete in view of the deletion of the subject matter requirement in draft Article 26(2)
(c). Draft Article 26(2)(c) specifically envisages the need for an interim measure to
preserve assets out of which a subsequent award may be satisfied. Security for costs 1s
encompassed by the words “preserving assets’””” as costs that can be awarded in the
award.

REQUIREMENTS FOR INTERIM RELIEF

It is accepted that “[t]he imposition of provisional measures is an extraordinary measure
which should not be granted lightly by the Arbitral Tribunal.””’ Specific circumstances

86 Atlantic Triton, cited in P. Friedland, p. 347 and in Schreuer et al., pp. 785-86; also cited in Pey
Casado, para. 88.

87 Cited in P. Friedland, p. 347.

88  Pey Casado, para. 86.

89 — Ibid., para. 86.

90 See also, Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29, Decision on Jurisdiction, November 14, 2005, para. 46.

91. Noah Rubins, Jn God we trust, all others pay cash: Security for costs in international commer-
cial arbitration, 11 Am. Rev. Int’. Ars. 343-44.

92 Report of the Working Group on the work of its 47th Session, Vienna, September 10-14, 2007,
A/CN.9/641, para. 48.

93 See,e.g., Maffezini, para. 10. Also Plama, para. 38.

528 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 528 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

must prevail under which the measure(s) cannot await the tribunal’s determination on
the merits. This being said, tribunals have not necessarily articulated a uniform test
when dealing with requests for interim relief, and the approaches adopted tend to vary
with the facts of the case. Amongst the tribunals that have articulated a clear test, one
can refer to the Occidental tribunal, for which “the circumstances under which provi-
sional measures are required under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention are those in
which the measures are necessary to preserve a party’s right and where the need 1s
urgent in order to avoid irreparable harm.’”**

In the view of the Encana tribunal, “three conditions ought in principle to be met
before interim measures are established whether under Article XII(8) of the BIT or
Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules. First, there must be an apparent basis of jurisdiction.
Second, the measure sought must be urgent. Third, the basis for establishing provi-
sional measures must be that otherwise irreparable damage could be caused to the
requesting party.”

This section will review (1) the initiative to request interim relief, (11) whether the
tribunal must have jurisdiction, (111) whether there must be a prima facie case on the
merits, (iv) whether the measure must be urgent, and (v) whether it must be necessary
for a tribunal to grant interim relief.

94 Occidental, para. 59, emphasis in the original. See for another ICSID illustration in City
Oriente: “[t]he requirements that the tribunal can take into consideration in ordering provi-
sional measures are (A) that the adoption of such measures be necessary to preserve petition-
er’s rights, (B) that their ordering be urgent, and (C) that each party has been afforded an
opportunity to raise observations.”, Decision on Provisional Measures, November 19, 2007,
para. 54. See also Burlington: “provisional measures can only be granted under the relevant
rules and standard if rights to be protected do exist (C below), and the measures are urgent
(D below) and necessary (E below), this last requirement implying an assessment of the risk of
harm to be avoided by the measures”, para. 51.

95 Encana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador, Interim Award of January 31, 2004 [hereinafter
Encana], para. 13. This case was brought under the 1996 Canada-Ecuador BIT, which con-
tains, in Article XIII(8) specific provisions on interim measures. Encana sought measures to
prevent freezing of assets of Encana’s subsidiaries and of its legal representative pending reso-
lution of the dispute by the tribunal. The tribunal rejected the request for provisional measures.
In passing, the tribunal stated that, as a specific provision, Article XIII (8) of the BIT was to
prevail over the general power in Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules. Nonetheless for the sake
of the present section, the findings of the tribunal are useful to shed some light on Article 26.

See also Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Company, CJSC Vostokneftegaz Company v.
Mongolia [hereinafter Paushok], Order on Interim Measures, September 2, 2008, an
UNCITRAL case under the Russian-Mongolian BIT in which the tribunal granted the claim-
ants’ request. Doing so, the tribunal noted that Article 26(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules left it a
wider discretion than under the ICSID Convention (para. 36). It set forth the following require-
ments: “(1) prima facie jurisdiction, (2) prima facie establishment of the case, (3) urgency, (4)
imminent danger of serious prejudice (necessity) and (5) proportionality” (para. 45). For an
analysis of this case, see Joe Matthews and Karen Stewart, Time to Evaluate the Standards for
Issuance of Interim Measures of Protection in International Investment Arbitration, 25(4) ARB.
InT’L 529-52 (2009).

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 529

20-Yannaca-20.indd 529 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

The Initiative to Request Interim Relief

ICSID system. ICSID Arbitration Rule 39(1) and Article 46(1) of the AF Arbitration
Rules start from the premise that either party may present a request to the tribunal, at
any time during the proceedings. In addition, Arbitration Rule 39(3) allows a tribunal
to “recommend” provisional measures “on its own initiative” or to recommend
measures “other than those specified in a request.” Article 46(1) of the AF Arbitration
Rules contains the same rule, although it allows a tribunal to “order” rather than
“recommend” provisional measures. This leaves the tribunal with a wide discretion.”
There is no information publicly available on any measures recommended by ICSID
tribunals proprio motu. Indeed, this would appear as an extremely rare occurrence in
practice.

Under the applicable rules, a tribunal is also free to recommend a different measure
than the one requested. An illustration can be found in Holiday Inns, in which the tri-
bunal declined to recommend a series of measures sought in the request and chose to
recommend instead that both parties “abstain from any measure incompatible with the
upholding of the contract.”

UNCITRAL Rules. Article 26(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides that
measures may be granted at the request of either party. Accordingly, on the face of
Article 26(1) and of the travaux préparatoires,’® an UNCITRAL tribunal would not be
empowered to order interim measures of its own motion.”” The same applies under the
draft Rules that provide that the measures can be granted upon the request of a party.

Jurisdiction of the Tribunal?

It is accepted that a tribunal does not need to assess that it has jurisdiction prior to
ruling on a request for interim relief. By its very nature, interim relief requires a prompt
determination that cannot await a full and final determination on jurisdiction. It is thus
sufficient for a tribunal to be satisfied that it has a prima facie jurisdiction. Investor-
state tribunals consistently rely on decisions of the International Court of Justice to
support this view.’ Since the case of Military and Paramilitary Activities in and

96 Pey Casado, paras. 15-16.

97 P. Lalive, p. 137.

98 Report of the Secretary-General on the Revised Draft Set of Arbitration, UNCITRAL,
9th Session, Addendum 1 (Commentary), UN Doc A/CN.9/112/Add.1 (1975), http://www.
uncitral.org/uncitral/en/commission/sessions/9th.html, p. 176 under art. 23.

99 See in this sense, D. Caron et al., pp. 533-34. See also C. Brower in footnote 1029.

100 This question elicited strong controversy over the years in the ICJ’s jurisprudence. See for
example for supporters of a jurisdiction clearly established, the dissenting opinion of Judge
Forster in the Nuclear Tests (Australia v. France/New Zealand v. France), Order of June 22,
1973, C.J. Reports 1973, p. 173, or Judge Morozov in his separate opinion in the Aegean Sea
Continental Shelf (Greece v. Turkey), Order of September 11, 1976, I.C.J. Reports 1976, p. 22
[hereinafter Aegean Sea Continental Shelf Case].

530 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 530 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America),'®! the ICJ has adopted a
consistent line of reasoning according to which it need not finally satisfy itself that it
has jurisdiction over the dispute, but its prima facie jurisdiction must be established.

ICSID practice. ICSID tribunals have also accepted that measures can be recom-
mended before the tribunal has ruled on all the objections to jurisdiction or on the
admissibility of the claims.'° An argument to this effect was found in the text of
Arbitration Rule 39, which mentions that a request may be made at any time. However,
the practice is not consistent as to whether and how prima facie jurisdiction ought to
be established. Older decisions either overlooked this issue or brushed it away. The
tribunal in Tokios Tokeles'® simply mentioned that a determination on interim relief
did not prejudge jurisdiction:

It is finally to be recalled that, as ICSID tribunals have repeatedly stated, the
‘recommendation’ of provisional measures does not in any way prejudge the ques-
tion of jurisdiction. It is, therefore, independently of the present Order on provi-
sional measures that this Tribunal will have to rule on the jurisdictional objections
raised by the Respondent.

The majority of the tribunals appear now to resort to the prima facie test in line with
the jurisprudence of the ICJ, as recently illustrated by the Occidental tribunal. The
latter stated that it would “not order such measures unless there is, prima facie, a basis
upon which the tribunal’s jurisdiction might be established.”!”

How can a tribunal be satisfied that it has prima facie jurisdiction? It has been
suggested that the determination made by the Secretary-General of the Centre when
registering the request for arbitration pursuant to Article 36 of the ICSID Convention
(i.e., unless the Secretary-General finds that the dispute is manifestly outside of
the jurisdiction of the Centre) was sufficient for the purpose of establishing

101. Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of
America), Provisional Measures, Order of May 10, 1984, I.C.J. Reports 1984, p. 169, para. 24.
S. Rosenne defines jurisdiction in this context as “jurisdiction both ratione personae and
ratione materiae over the merits of the claim, as well as jurisdiction to determine whether the
provisional measures requested are compatible with the principal claim and do not change the
nature of the claim as advanced in the application instituting the proceedings”, p. 92 (footnotes
omitted, italics in the original).

The ICJ’s position can also be illustrated by the Case Concerning Pulp Mills on the River
Uruguay (Argentina v. Uruguay), in which the Court stated: “57. Whereas in dealing with a
request for provisional measures, the Court need not finally satisfy itself that it has Jurisdiction
on the merits of the case, but will not indicate such measures unless the provisions invoked by
the applicant appear, prima facie, to afford a basis on which the jurisdiction of the Court might
be established (see Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002)
(Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda), Provisional Measures, Order of July 10, 2002,
I.C.J. Reports 2002, p. 241, para. 58)”, Order of July 13, 2006, also reiterated in Order of
January 23, 2007, para. 24 [hereinafter Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay].

102 See, e.g., Pey Casado, para. 5.
103. Tokios Tokeles, Order No. 1, July 1, 2003.
104 Occidental, para. 55.

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 531

20-Yannaca-20.indd 531 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

prima facie jurisdiction.'® Certain authors have indeed put forward that “although the
tribunal is, of course, in no way bound by this preliminary examination of jurisdiction
[made by the Secretary General], it provides a useful basis for its power to recommend
provisional measures.”

Most of the tribunals do not limit themselves to referring to the Secretary-General’s
positive assessment but carry out their own review. In practice, tribunals either exam-
ine whether there is no manifest reason for excluding their jurisdiction (the “unless
approach” leaving the benefit of the doubt to the claimant) or whether a provision
confers prima facie jurisdiction upon them. The Occidental tribunal, for example,
reviewed the grounds invoked for its jurisdiction and concluded that prima facie there
was a basis for jurisdiction.'!°’ Some tribunals have proceeded to a more thorough
prima facie analysis than others. For instance, in an unpublished decision, an ICSID
tribunal not only reviewed the grounds invoked for jurisdiction but also satisfied itself
that the conditions of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention were prima facie met.

In any event, the tribunal’s prima facie determination does not prejudge its later
decision on jurisdiction. Neither does it preclude any jurisdictional objections raised
within the relevant period of time.

UNCITRAL practice. The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules are silent as to whether the
jurisdiction of the tribunal needs to be established for purposes of an order for interim
relief. The early decisions of the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal did not consistently require
an express finding of prima facie jurisdiction.'°* However, following the ICJ’s reason-
ing in the Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v.
United States of America) mentioned earlier, the tribunal also required that prima facie
jurisdiction over the merits be shown.’ The Encana tribunal referred to “an apparent
basis of jurisdiction,’’'!° although it did not need to enter into that discussion, having
found that there was no necessity for the measures.

105 See C. Brower & R. Goodman, p. 455. It was also noted in Pey Casado that the criterion under
Article 36 of the ICSID Convention (unless the Secretary-General finds that the dispute is
manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Centre) resembles to a certain extent to the prima
facie test of the ICJ (para. 8). This said, one must keep in mind that the determination of the
Secretary General under Article 36 of the ICSID Convention is only made on the basis of the
information contained in the request for arbitration, without having heard the other party.

106 Schreuer et al., para. 48 and P. Friedland.

107. Occidental, para. 55. See also SGS v. Pakistan, p. 299.

10s C. Brower, p. 218.

109 C. Brower, p. 220; see Ford Aerospace and Communications Corporation and the Air Force of
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Interim Award No. 39-159-3, June 4, 1984, reprinted in 6 IRAN-
USCTR 104, which discussed jurisdiction over counterclaims. Also Bendone—Derossi
International and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Interim Award No. 40-375-1,
June 7, 1984, reprinted in 6 IRAN-USCTR 130.

110 Encana, para. 13.

532 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 532 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

Prima Facie Case on the Merits?

Showing a prima facie case on the merits is generally required in commercial arbitra-
tion where tribunals are allowed to make an overall assessment of the merits of the
case to establish whether the party’s case is “sufficiently strong to merit protection.”""!
Whether the applicant must establish that it has a prima facie case on the merits in an
investor-state arbitration in order to obtain interim relief is debatable. As observed by
authors,

[a]lthough the likelihood of success on the merits of the underlying claim is required
for injunctive relief in many municipal systems, it rarely is articulated in public
international arbitration as a factor to be considered in the granting of interim
measures. It is a factor nonetheless, albeit sotto voce. It certainly is appropriate that
when a case manifestly lacks merit, necessarily costly and disruptive interim mea-
sures to protect such dubious rights should not be granted. A tribunal must deter-
mine prima facie not only whether it possesses jurisdiction but also whether the
question presented by the case is frivolous. The reluctance of tribunals to openly
voice their consideration of this factor probably reflects in large part a desire to
avoid embarrassment to a sovereign state party to the arbitration or accusations of
pre-judging the case.'!

UNCITRAL Rules. Under the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules, doubt was permitted on the
need to establish a prima facie case. However, and in line with the general practice in
commercial arbitration, it has been suggested that under the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules,
“Ta|lthough at the interim measures stage an arbitral tribunal should not be overly con-
cerned with the merits of the case, a party whose case is clearly without merit should
not be granted a request for interim measures. There can be no prejudice if there is little
or no prospect that the alleged right threatened will be recognized as a right.””'!? Draft
Article 26(3)(b) makes it clear and requires “a reasonable possibility that the request-
ing party will succeed on the merits of the claim,” except in relation with requests for
preservation of evidence.

The tribunal in the Paushok case made the prima facie establishment of the case one
of the requirements to be met to grant interim relief. Doing so, it noted that:

... the Tribunal need not go beyond whether a reasonable case has been made,
which, if the facts alleged are proven, might possibly lead the Tribunal to the
conclusion that an award could be made in favour of Claimants. Essentially, the
Tribunal needs to decide only that the claims made are not, on their face, frivolous
or obviously outside the competence of the Tribunal. To do otherwise would require
the Tribunal to proceed to a determination of the facts and, in practice, to a hearing

111 See Att YESILIRMAK, PROVISIONAL MEASURES IN INTERNATIONAL COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION 5—29
(Kluwer 2005); see also K. Hobér, p. 735. It is also a common feature in the jurisprudence of
the Court of Justice of the European Communities under the fumus boni juris doctrine.

112. D. Caron, Leiden, pp. 237-38 (footnotes omitted, emphasis in the original).

113. D,. Caron et al., p. 537.

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 533

20-Yannaca-20.indd 533 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

on the merits of the case, a lengthy and complicated process which would defeat the

very purpose of interim measures.''*

ICSID system. Showing a prima facie case is not an express requirement under the
ICSID Convention, in line with the ICJ’s practice.!'° This said, depending on the nature
of the request, an ICSID tribunal examines the prima facie merits of the case to a cer-
tain extent, when it appreciates the rights for which interim protection is requested.
Indeed, one can ponder whether the test for asserting a theoretically existing right or
showing the appearance of a right as mentioned above, is fundamentally different from
a showing of a prima facie case on the merits. It is submitted that it is not, provided the
prima facie test is understood as a demonstration that the applicant’s case is not entirely
without merit, in other words, not devoid of any chance of prevailing. With this under-
standing, the tests are not different in essence. Be this as it may, the question appears
to be limited to cases where the relief aims at protecting a specific right, such as spe-
cific performance. In other cases, such as cases aiming at the preservation of evidence
or the protection of the tribunal’s jurisdiction, there seems to be no requirement to
establish a prima facie case on the merits.

Urgency

Beyond the issue of whether urgency is a requirement for the granting of interim relief
in investor-state arbitration, which will be examined first, the concept of urgency has a
practical impact on the way proceedings are conducted and will be reviewed thereafter.

Is urgency a requirement? Although none of the arbitration rules addressed here
expressly mentions urgency, it appears to be one of the requirements for the granting
of interim relief. Indeed, unless there is urgency in the situation presented to the tribu-
nal, the relief sought can await the determination on the merits.

ICSID system. A leading author observed that “an attempt to have reference to
urgency and imminent danger was defeated” in the preparation of the Convention.'!®

114. Paushok, para. 55, footnote omitted.

115 While Article 41 of the ICJ Statute is silent on this issue and the Court has not set any clear
standards in this regard, it has been suggested that “as there must be at least a prima facie basis
for the substantive jurisdiction, there must also be some prospects of success on the merits of
the case, for otherwise there would not be any necessity to indicate provisional measures”
(Zimmermann et al., para. 35). “The aspects concerning the prospects of success of the applica-
tion do not play an important role in the practice of the Court because inter-State disputes are
usually complex so that the prospects of success are not easily evaluated (ibid., para. 36); but
see contra S. Rosenne (“It is arguable that this [if the Court considers that circumstances so
require] also can imply some assessment by the Court of the nature of the decision on the merits
and the chances of each party on the merits. But speculation of that nature is hardly compatible
with the international judicial function” referring to Maffezini, op. cit., p. 72).

116 Schreuer et al., para. 63 under Article 47.

534 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 534 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:03 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

Rather, the criterion is whether “‘a question cannot await the outcome of the award on
the merits.”!'’ Some tribunals, when dealing with a request for provisional measures,
have not discussed the matter of urgency at all.!'> Others have found guidance in the
test applied by the ICJ'!° and have characterized urgency as one of the requirements for
interim relief. The tribunal in Pey Casado stated that it is “in the very nature of the
institution of provisional measures that they are not only provisional, but also and
above all urgent, that is to say that they must be or be able to be decided quickly.”!”°
For its part, the Plama tribunal declared “t]he need for provisional measures must be
urgent and necessary to preserve the status quo or avoid the occurrence of irreparable
harm or damage.””'”! The latter part of the requirement is examined later in this section.
The Occidental tribunal recalled that “[i]t 1s also well established that provisional mea-
sures should only be granted in situations of necessity and urgency in order to protect
rights that could, absent such measures, be definitely lost.”!?? Or, in the words of the
Perenco tribunal, “[p]rovisional measures may only be granted where they are urgent,
because they cannot be necessary if, for the time being, there is no demonstrable need
for them.”!”

UNCITRAL Rules. There is no requirement of urgency in the Rules or in the draft
Rules. The Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal does not seem to have referred to it as a neces-
sary requirement either. It must be said however that the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal
focused instead on the notion of irreparable harm, which will be examined shortly. By
contrast, the Encana and Paushok tribunals emphasized that urgency was an important
requirement in the context of investor-state arbitration. !74

What is urgency? Urgency is usually considered on a case-by-case basis, depending
on the facts of the case and on the rights to be protected. According to the ICJ, “[a]
measure is urgent where ‘action prejudicial to the rights of either party is likely to be

117 Lbid.

118 See, for example, Maffezini and Tokios Tokeles.

119 Inthe words of the ICJ, “Whereas the power of the Court to indicate provisional measures will be
exercised only if there is urgency in the sense that there is a real risk that action prejudicial to the
rights of either party might be taken before the Court has given its final decision (see, for example,
Passage through the Great Belt (Finland v. Denmark), Provisional Measures, Order of July 29,
1991, 1.C.J. Reports 1991, p. 17, para. 23. Certain Criminal Proceedings in France (Republic of the
Congo v. France), Provisional Measure, Order of June 17, 2003, I.C.J. Reports 2003, p. 107, para.
22; Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentina v. Uruguay), Preliminary Objections, Order of
January 23, 2007, p. 11, para. 32); and whereas the Court thus has to consider whether in the cur-
rent proceedings such urgency exists.”, Case Concerning Application of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian
Federation), Order of October 15, 2008, para. 129 [hereinafter Case Concerning Application of the
Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination].

120 Pey Casado, para. 5.

121 Plama, para. 38.

122 Occidental, para. 59.

123 Perenco, para. 43.

124 Encana, para. 13; Paushok, para. 45.

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 535

20-Yannaca-20.indd 535 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

taken before [a] final decision is given.’”'”° Few tribunals, however, have elaborated
on the notion of urgency and on the level of urgency required. The Biwater tribunal
noted that “whilst it was a common ground that this is a requirement, for its own part
the Arbitral Tribunal considers that the requirement needs more elaboration.”!”° It then
observed that the notion of urgency can vary:

In the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, the degree of ‘urgency’ which is required depends
on the circumstances, including the requested provisional measures, and may be
satisfied where a party can prove that there is a need to obtain the requested measure
at a certain point in the procedure before the issuance of an award. In most situa-
tions, this will equate to “urgency” in the traditional sense (i.e. a need for a measure
in a short space of time). In some cases, however, the only time constraint is that
the measure be granted before an award — even if the grant is to be some time hence.
The Arbitral Tribunal also considers that the level of urgency required depends on
the type of measure which is requested.!?’

The tribunal in City Oriente made the following assessment on the issue of
urgency:

In the Tribunal’s opinion, the passing of the provisional measures is indeed urgent,
precisely to keep the enforced collection or termination proceedings from being
started, as this operates as a pressuring mechanism, aggravates and extends the
dispute and, by itself, impairs the rights which Claimant seeks to protect through
this arbitration. Furthermore, where, as is the case here, the issue is to protect the
jurisdictional powers of the Tribunal and the integrity of the arbitration and the
final award, then the urgency requirement is met by the very nature of the issue.'”®

The circumstances of the case are thus critical in assessing the level of urgency of a
request. For example in Burlington, the tribunal found that urgency lied with the non-
aggravation of the dispute!”’: “[.. .] when the measures are intended to protect against
the aggravation of the dispute during the proceedings, the urgency requirement is
fulfilled by definition”'*° or by the very nature of the objective sought.

As a general proposition, it appears reasonable to consider that the urgency require-
ment is met as soon as the decision over the provisional measures cannot wait until the

125 Passage Trough the Great Belt Case, in which Finland submitted that the rights of passage
through the Great Belt of ships, including drill ships and oil rigs, to and from Finnish ports and
shipyards was threatened by the construction of a fixed bridge over the Great Belt by Denmark.
The ICJ considered that there was no need to indicate Denmark to freeze construction work of
the East Channel Bridge since the Passage was only to be hindered with the installation of
cable works not before the end of 1994, by which time the Court would have disposed of the
case (Order of July 29, 1991, I.C.J. Reports 1991, p. 12). Cited in Occidental, para. 59. See
also, Case Concerning Application of the Convention on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, para. 129.

126 Biwater, para. 76.

127. Biwater, para. 76.

128 City Oriente, Decision on Provisional Measures, para. 69.

129 Burlington, para. 74

130 = Ibid., with a reference to City Oriente.

536 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 536 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

final award. This said, the degree of urgency can also be higher and may influence
when and how a tribunal will deal with an application for provisional measures.

Urgency and the procedural aspects of an ICSID or AF case. Pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 39(2) and Article 46(1) of the AF Arbitration Rules, the tribunal must
give priority to the consideration of the request for interim relief, thus reflecting the
urgency of the matter. To expedite the process, Arbitration Rule 39(5) was introduced
in April 2006 in order to allow the presentation of a request whilst the tribunal is being
constituted. !?!

Tribunals can prioritize the request in different ways. In practice, tribunals can con-
vene a hearing or take a decision by correspondence. Before making a decision, they
must give both parties the opportunity of presenting their observations. Unlike other
arbitration regimes, the ICSID system contains no provisions on ex parte measures. If
a party does not avail itself of the opportunity to present its observations, this failure
will of course not be viewed as an obstacle to the issuance of an order.'*

To what extent should the parties be offered the opportunity to present their obser-
vations when there is a matter of urgency?

In City Oriente v. Ecuador, the claimant requested that the respondents refrain from
collecting on a claim of over US$28 million that was in dispute before the ICSID tri-
bunal but had already been enforced locally. It also asked that the respondents refrain
from initiating proceedings seeking a declaration of termination of the concession on
the ground of nonpayment as well as criminal complaints. In other words, the claimant
requested the maintenance of the status quo as a matter of urgency. In a letter to the
parties, the tribunal ordered the respondents to refrain inter alia from instituting or
prosecuting any judicial action and from demanding payment pending the tribunal’s
determination on provisional measures, which was in effect equivalent to granting
ex parte measures. It then called a hearing one month after the filing of the request. The
respondents requested a three-month postponement to select outside counsel. The tri-
bunal accepted to defer the hearing, provided that Ecuador undertook to neither initiate
or procure judicial action nor to demand payment. Ecuador having failed to do so by
the required date, the tribunal held the hearing on the date initially scheduled. It in
particular noted that the respondents had in-house counsel with sufficient knowledge
to adequately defend their interests.'*? Emphasizing the urgency of the measures, the
tribunal granted the claimant’s request within two months of its presentation.

131 This amendment although modest is considered to represent “an important contribution to the
availability of prompt provisional measures,” Carolyn B. Lamm, Hansel T. Pham and Chiara
Giorgetti, Interim Measures and Dismissal Under the 2006 ICSID Rules, in THE FUTURE OF
INVESTMENT ARBITRATION 106 (OUP 2009). A similar provision was not deemed necessary in
the AF Arbitration Rules since the parties can resort to domestic courts if urgency requires it.

132. City Oriente, Decision on Provisional Measures, para. 70. The tribunal underlined the need for
affording both parties the opportunity to provide their observations. It concluded that when this
had been done, and even if one of the parties has failed to provide its observations, a measure
can be recommended.

133 City Oriente, Decision on Provisional Measures, para. 81.

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 537

20-Yannaca-20.indd 537 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

Similarly, the Perenco tribunal requested the parties not to alter the status quo
until “it had an opportunity to further hear from the parties on the question of provi-
sional measures.”'** It later added that such request had the same authority as a recom-
mendation. '*° It also noted in its Decision on Provisional Measures that it had not
issued the request without having received submissions from both parties.

Urgency and the administration ofan UNCITRAL case. Article 26 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules contains no provisions specifically addressing the procedure to be
followed in connection with a request for provisional measures. This being so,
Article 15(1) stipulates generally that the parties must be treated with equality and
given a “full opportunity” to present their case at any stage of the proceedings.

There have been instances, though, in which the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal issued
orders without first hearing the opposing party. These orders were given pending fur-
ther determination of the request for interim measures. They were rendered because
there was an urgent compelling need to stay local proceedings’ or to prevent the sale
of goods.'*’ Whether the power to issue such ex parte orders is an inherent procedural
power of the tribunal or is encompassed in the 1976 version of Article 26(1) has been
discussed, with a preference being expressed for the latter solution. !**

The question whether an UNCITRAL tribunal can issue a temporary order upon
request of a party without notice of the request to the other party was subject to exten-
sive discussion during the revision of the UNCITRAL Model Law.'* Article 17B and
C of the Model Law now provides for “preliminary orders” granted ex parte for a
maximum duration of 21 days when it is likely that harm not adequately reparable by
an award on damages would occur if the order is not granted. Article 17E of the Model
Law further considers the provision of a security by the applicant. Draft Article 26(5)
of the Arbitration Rules also envisages the possibility of a “temporary order” without
prior notice to the other party when prior disclosure of the request for interim measures
to the party against whom it is made would risk frustrating the purpose of the measure
in question. This power would be conditional upon a prohibition contained in the
lex arbitri.'*° Indeed, the 2009 version of draft Article 26(5) makes it clear that the
admissibility of preliminary orders is governed by the law applicable to the arbitration
proceedings. !"!

134 + Perenco, para. 28.

135 Perenco, para. 76.

136 Teledyne Industries Incorporated and the Islamic Republic of Iran, Order, September 9, 1983,
Case No. 10812, Chamber Two, reprinted in 3 IRAN-USCTR 336.

137. Shipside Packing Company, Incorporated and the Islamic Republic of Iran, Interim Award
No. 27-11875-1, September 6, 1983, reprinted in 3 IRAN-USCTR 331.

138 D. Caron, Leiden, p. 228.

139 Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Mesures ex parte et injonctions préliminaires, in LES MESURES
PRovisorrRES DANS L’ ARBITRAGE COMMERCIAL INTERNATIONAL, EVOLUTIONS ET INNOVATIONS,
Dépats ET CoLLtoquss, No. 14 (LexisNexis 2007).

140 Report of the Working Group on the work of its 47th Session, Vienna, September 10-14, 2007,
A/CN.9/641, para. 59.

141. Note A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.154.Add.1, para. 28.

538 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 538 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

The Working Group reported that this provision elicited concerns especially in the
context of investor-state disputes,'** although it gave no reasons for such concerns in
its report.

Urgency usually interrelates with other factors that call for the necessity of the
measures.

Necessity or Risk of Irreparable Harm

Article 26 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules refers to any measures that the tribunal
deems necessary. The word “necessary” does not appear in the new draft Rules. It is
not mentioned in the ICSID provisions either. Necessity appears nonetheless to be an
indispensable feature. The need to grant a measure is assessed by balancing the degree
of harm suffered by the applicant but for the measure. In other words, on a “balance of
convenience” basis, the necessity of a measure is assessed against the consequence for
the applicant of the absence of the measure. Tribunals have routinely assessed these
consequences in light of the irreparable harm the applicant would suffer if the measure
were not granted.

International precedents. The International Court of Justice consistently conditions
the indication of provisional measures upon a showing of “irreparable prejudice.” It is
commonly said that the notion of irreparable harm or prejudice derives from the common-
law concept of irreparable injury. This said, the exact meaning of the “irreparable
harm” standard of international law appears uncertain. Irreparable harm or prejudice
was first defined by the Permanent Court of International Justice as one that cannot be
compensated by way of damages or restitution in some other material form.'*? This
narrow test has been abandoned in the ICJ’s subsequent practice,'** except for the
Aegean Sea Continental Shelf Case.'*

142 Report of the Working Group on the work of its 47th Session, Vienna, September 10-14, 2007,
A/CN.9/641, para. 55. Report of the Working Group on the work of its 50th Session, New
York, February 9-13, 2009, A/CN.9/669, para. 104.

143. Denunciation of the Treaty of 2 November 1865 between China and Belgium (Belgium v.
China), also known as the Sino Belgian Treaty Case, 1927 P.C.I.J. Series A, No. 8, p. 7 (Order
of February 21, 1927).

144. The ICJ’s order on provisional measures rendered in the Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay case
illustrates the Court’s recent practice. The Court stated in its Order of July 13, 2006: “62.
Whereas the power of the Court to indicate provisional measures to maintain the respective
rights of the parties is to be exercised only if there is an urgent need to prevent irreparable
prejudice to the rights that are the subject of the dispute before the Court has had an opportu-
nity to render its decision (see Passage through the Great Belt (Finland v. Denmark), provi-
sional Measures, Order of July 29, 1991, I.C.J. Reports 1991, p. 17, para. 23; Certain Criminal
Proceedings in France (Republic of the Congo v. France), Provisional Measure, Order of June 17,
2003, I.C.J. Reports 2003, p. 107, para. 22).”

145 Aegean Sea Continental Shelf Case, para. 33.““Whereas, in the present instance, the alleged
breach by Turkey of the exclusivity of the right claimed by Greece to acquire information
concerning the natural resources of areas of continental shelf, if it were established, is one that

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 539

20-Yannaca-20.indd 539 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

ICSID system. ICSID practice refers routinely to ICJ precedents and to the notion of
irreparable harm. The Tokios Tokeles tribunal considered that, under Article 47, a pro-
visional measure had to be urgent and necessary and that it was necessary if “there is
a threat or possibility of irreparable harm to the rights invoked.’’!*° Similarly, the
Occidental tribunal recalled that, according to the ICJ, “a provisional measure is nec-
essary where the actions of a party ‘are capable of causing or of threatening irreparable
prejudice to the rights invoked.’”'*’ The tribunal assessed irreparable harm in light of
the existence of a monetary relief. The Occidental tribunal found that there was no
irreparable harm since the claimants’ harm, if any, could be compensated by a monetary
award. '*8

In the same vein, the Plama tribunal mentioned that it accepted the respondent’s
argument that the harm was not irreparable if it could be compensated by damages!*”
but did not discuss the matter further. Similarly, the tribunal in Metalclad v. Mexico
denied the request and underlined that the measures must be required to protect the
applicant’s rights from “an injury that cannot be made good by subsequent payment of
damages.”!*°

By contrast, the City Oriente tribunal favored the urgency requirement over the need
for irreparable harm. It considered that the Tokios Tokeles decision was isolated’*' and
had adopted too strict an approach to Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. Turning to
the existence of irreparable harm, the City Oriente tribunal distinguished its case from
investment cases where the sole relief sought by the claimants is damages, while City
Oriente was seeking contract performance.'*” The tribunal recalled in its decision not
to revoke the measures granted that it had verified that neither Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention nor Arbitration Rule 39 “require that provisional measures be ordered
only as means to prevent irreparable harm.”!**

might be capable of reparation by appropriate means; and whereas it follows that the Court is
unable to find in that alleged breach of Greece’s rights such a risk of irreparable prejudice to
rights in issue before the Court as might require the exercise of its power under Article 41 of
the Statute to indicate interim measures for their preservation”. The test was criticized
by Judge Elias in his Separate Opinion in which he stated “It means that the State which has
the ability to pay can under this principle commit wrongs against another State with
impunity, since it discounts the fact that the injury by itself might be sufficient to cause
irreparable harm to the national susceptibilities of the offended State. The rightness or
wrongness of the action itself does not seem to matter. This is a principle upon which, con-
temporary international law should frown: might should no longer be right in today’s inter-
State relations.” p. 30

146 Tokios Tokeles, Procedural Order 3, para. 8.

147 Occidental, para. 59, quoting President Jiménez de Aréchaga in the Aegean Sea Continental
Shelf Case.

148 Occidental, para. 92.

149 Plama, para. 46.

150 Metalclad, para. 8.

151 City Oriente, Decision on Revocation, para. 82.

152. Ibid., para. 86.

153. Ibid., para. 70.

540 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 540 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

The Burlington tribunal for its part referred to the standard of “harm not adequately
reparable by an award of damages” used by the UNCITRAL Model Law’ (see below).
It stressed that its decision sought to avoid “the destruction of an ongoing investment
and of its revenue producing potential which benefits both the investor and the State.”
Unlike Occidental, it was not a case of avoidance of the increase of existing damage
due to the passage of time; it was a case of avoidance of a different damage.

Be this as it may, tribunals established under the ICSID Convention or the AF Rules
have generally adopted a rather strict approach to the definition of irreparable harm,
which departs from the ICJ’s current practice. One could think of explaining this
difference by the fact that in an investor-state dispute, the claimants usually seek mon-
etary relief, while in State-to-State disputes the relief sought can differ considerably.'*°
This would not be a convincing explanation. In commercial arbitrations, the claimants
most often seek monetary relief, and the harm standard is more relaxed (see UNCITRAL
Rules below). In reality, one should rather ask whether investment tribunals may not
over time adopt a less strict standard under the influence of the practice of the ICJ and
commercial arbitration.

Irreparable harm does not only concern the applicant. The Occidental tribunal
recalled that the risk of harm must be assessed with respect to the rights of either party.
Specifically, it stated that “provisional measures may not be awarded for the protection
of the rights of one party where such provisional measures would cause irreparable
harm to the rights of the other party, in this case, the rights of a sovereign State,”'*’
namely its sovereign rights to dispose freely of its lawfully held property. In the same
spirit, the City Oriente tribunal stressed the need to weigh the interests at stake against
each other. Referring to Article 17A(1)(c) of the UNCITRAL Model Law, it empha-
sized the balance of interests that needed to be struck, stating:

It is not so essential that provisional measures be necessary to prevent irreparable
harm, but that the harm spared the petitioner by such measures must be significant
and that it exceed greatly the damage caused to the party affected thereby.!*°

UNCITRAL Rules. It has been debated whether the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
required the applicant to show a risk of irreparable harm. One author has submitted that

154 Burlington, para. 82.

155 Burlington, para. 83.

156 Indeed, one must take into account the nature of the cases brought before the ICJ and the risk
of irreparable harm to persons which may motivate provisional measures. See, e.g., the
LaGrand Case, wherein the ICJ observed “[w]hereas the execution of Walter LaGrand is
ordered for March 3, 1999; and whereas such an execution would cause irreparable harm to the
rights claimed by Germany in this particular case”, LaGrand, Provisional Measures, Order of
March 3, 1999, para. 24, I.C.J. Reports 1999, p. 9.

157. Occidental, para. 93.

158 City Oriente, Decision on Revocation, para. 72. A similar approach was followed by the
Burlington tribunal, para. 82. That tribunal noted that “provisional measures are in the interest
of both sides if they are adequately structured”, para. 85. In order to preserve each party’s right,
it ordered the establishment of an escrow account.

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 541

20-Yannaca-20.indd 541 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

no such requirement was implied and that it was sufficient that the act to be enjoined
would substantially prejudice the rights in dispute. To wit,

[t]hat article 26 does not require irreparable prejudice is evident from the example in
that article of an appropriate interim measure: ‘the sale of perishable goods.’ Surely
the loss of goods, the sale price of which is ascertainable, is not irreparable.!*°

This said, the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal has largely endorsed the requirement of
irreparable harm. The notion of irreparable harm was discussed for the first time in
1984 in the case of Boeing and the Islamic Republic of Iran.'® In this case, Chamber
One denied a stay of execution since it was not necessary to protect a party from
irreparable harm. In passing, it observed that “monetary damages are not irreparable
harm” and that the tribunal had the power to compensate any harm caused by the
execution. Faced with a subsequent application in the same case, Judge Holtzmann
noted in a concurring opinion that showing that the execution of a judgment would
cause grave or irreparable monetary harm to Iran could not be the only test, as “[t]he
loss of a treaty right to be free of litigation in another forum may itself be irreparable.’’'®!
A subsequent case embraced a more flexible approach. In Behring International, the
tribunal considered that the concept of irreparable prejudice in international law is
broader than the Anglo-American law concept of irreparable injury and that the avail-
ability of monetary remedy was not a bar to granting interim relief.'° Nonetheless, the
review of the decisions of the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal shows that the admission of
irreparable harm is closely linked to the nonexistence of monetary relief. Indeed,

... [o]n balance, it has been the practice of the Tribunal to conclude that, except
where unique property is involved, irreparable prejudice is difficult to establish

159 D, Caron, Leiden, pp. 241-42.

160 Boeing et al. and the Islamic Republic of Iran, Interim Award No. 34-222-1 at 4, February 17,
1984, reprinted in 5 IRAN-USCTR 152.

161 Concurring Opinion of Judge Holtzmann dated August 27, 1984, attached to the Interim Award
No. 38-222-1, May 25, 1984, reprinted in 6 IRAN-USCTR 43.

162 Behring International, where the tribunal stated: “A definition of ‘irreparable prejudice’ is
elusive; however, the concept of irreparable prejudice in international law arguably is broader
than the Anglo-American law concept of irreparable injury. While the latter formulation
requires a showing that the injury complained of is not remediable by an award of damages
(i.e., where there is no certain pecuniary standard for the measure of damages, 43 C.J.S.
Injunctions § 23), the former does not necessarily so require. See Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. Case
(U.K. v. Iran), 1951 L.C.J. 89, 94 (interim Protection Order of July 5) (ordering, inter alia, joint
control of contested oil company with profits to be deposited in escrow account. Arguably,
rights sought to be protected susceptible to reparation by award of damages); Fisheries
Jurisdiction Case (U.K. v. Ice.), 1972 I.C.J. 12, 13 (interim Protection Order of 17 Aug.)
(ordering Iceland not to enforce extension of exclusive fishing zone beyond pre-existing 12
mile limit. Arguably, any damage to U.K. fishing industry reparable by damages); Goldsworthy,
Interim Measures of Protection in the International Court of Justice, 68 Am. J. Int’L L. 258, 269
(1974) (‘the [I.C.J.] test is not whether adequate compensation can ultimately be provided but
whether “irreparable prejudice” would be occasioned to the rights of the applicant if interim
protection is refused’).”

542 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 542 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

since monetary damages generally are considered adequate to compensate the
requesting party for any actual damages.'™

The tribunal in the UNCITRAL case of Paushok v. Mongolia took a different
approach. Distinguishing itself from the Plama, Occidental, and City Oriente ICSID
tribunals'® and relying on the Behring case, it concluded that “‘irreparable harm’ in
international law has a flexible meaning.”’® It also referred to Article 17A of the
UNCITRAL Model Law, which only required that “harm not adequately reparable by
an award of damages is likely to result if the measures are not ordered.”'® It found that
the claimants faced substantial prejudice, namely possible insolvency and bankruptcy
of one of the claimants, and the complete loss of their investment. The tribunal con-
cluded “[w]hile it is true that Claimants would still have a recourse in damages and that
other arbitral tribunals have indicated that debt aggravation [in City Oriente] was not
sufficient to award inter1m measures, the unique circumstances of this case justify a
different conclusion.”'*’ The tribunal further weighed the balance of inconvenience in
the imposition of interim measures and found that it was in the interest of both parties
to issue an order.'® It is submitted that the risk of bankruptcy present in this case cer-
tainly constituted a risk of harm not compensable by monetary damages.

A different approach has also been adopted in draft Article 26(3), which provides
that the requesting party shall satisfy the arbitral tribunal that if the measure is not
ordered, the likely result is a “harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages.”
In its discussion of the Model Law, the UNCITRAL Working Group adopted a similar
wording. The words “harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages” were
seen as not presenting a threshold as high as the “irreparable harm” test and leaving
some discretion to the tribunal in deciding upon the issuance of an interim measure.'”
The concept of “not adequately reparable” is indeed less demanding than the requirement

163. C. Brower, p. 229.

164 The Paushok tribunal stated: “The Tribunal is aware of preceding awards concluding that even
the possible aggravation of a debt of a claimant did not (‘generally’ says the City Oriente case
cited below) open the door to interim measures when, as in this case, the damages suffered could
be the subject of monetary compensation, on the basis that no irreparable harm would have been
caused [referring to Plama, Occidental and City Oriente in its decision on revocation]. And,
were it not for the specific characteristics of this case, the Tribunal might have reached the
same conclusion, although it might have expressed reservations about the concept that the pos-
sibility of monetary compensation is always sufficient to bar any request for interim measures
under the UNCITRAL Rules,” para. 62.

165 Paushok, paras. 68-69.

166 = Ibid., para. 69.

167 Ibid., para. 78.

168 Paushok, para. 84. The tribunal found that the respondent had an interest that its second largest
gold producer continued its operations (para. 83). On that basis, the tribunal ordered inter alia
the suspension of the payment of the windfall profit tax (the validity of which under the BIT
was the subject matter of the dispute) owing by one of the claimants and that claimants provide
a security of US$ 2 million, either through an escrow account or through a bank guarantee,
until a final award is rendered.

169 Note by the Secretariat, 43rd Session, A/CN.9/WGII/WP.138.

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 543

20-Yannaca-20.indd 543 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

of an “irreparable harm.’”’'”? Thus, the draft Arbitration Rules, consistent with
Article 17A(1)(c) of the Model Law, have moved away from too strict a test. As already
mentioned, in the context of a request for preserving evidence, this requirement would
only apply to the extent the tribunal considers it appropriate. It remains to be seen
whether this trend toward a less demanding standard in commercial and UNCITRAL
investor-state arbitration will influence the practice of tribunals in the ICSID system.

Finally, draft Article 26(3), in line with the Model Law, highlights the need to
balance the interests at stake. The likelihood of irreparable harm to the requesting
party must “substantially outweigh” the harm which the measures sought are likely to
cause to the other party.

AGAINST WHOM CAN THE MEASURES BE ORDERED?

The measures are usually recommended against the other disputing party. One leading
author has suggested that an ICSID tribunal could recommend a measure to be carried
out by a third party, especially a court of a third State.'”! One has difficulty, however,
identifying the source of the tribunal’s authority vis-a-vis a non party.

The Plama tribunal dismissed the claimant’s request to discontinue local proceed-
ings and noted that, at least with regard to local bankruptcy proceedings, the parties are
not the same since the proceedings were brought by private parties and not by the state.
The tribunal then explained that it was “reluctant to recommend to a State that it order
its courts to deny third parties the right to pursue their judicial remedies and [was] not
satisfied that if it did so in this case, Respondent would have the power to impose its
will on an independent judiciary.”"””

The Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal also considered that a request for interim relief
directed against a non party to the case could not be granted.!”

EFFECT OF INTERIM MEASURES

While the measures so ordered will lapse upon the issuance of the award, their effect
in the meantime is disputed. There are two distinct issues when it comes to the effect
of interim measures: to which extent is the recommendation or order binding on the
parties and is it enforceable? These issues are linked to the nature of the decision
rendered. As a related issue, the conditions upon which an order or recommendation
can be modified or terminated will also be discussed below.

170 As mentioned earlier, this standard was adopted by the ICSID tribunal in Burlington,
para. 82.

171 Schreuer et al., para. 153.

172 Plama, para. 43.

173. Atlantic Richfield Co. and the Islamic Republic of Iran et al., Interim Award No. 50-396-1, May 8,
1985, reprinted in 8 IRAN-USCTR 181. In that case, the request was directed at the United
States which were not a party to the specific proceedings.

544 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 544 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

ICSID Convention Cases

Nature of the decision. Pursuant to Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and
Arbitration Rule 39, unless the parties agree otherwise, a tribunal can only “recom-
mend” provisional measures. The use of the word “recommend” has stirred discus-
sions as to the binding character of the measures. The travaux préparatoires show that
the drafters first envisaged the word “prescribe,” which was ultimately replaced by the
term “recommend” in order “to indicate that there was no direct sanction for not
following the recommendation of the Tribunal.”!”* This decision was adopted in the
context of a strong division about the binding nature of the measures and the tribunal’s
power to impose sanctions for non compliance.

Nonetheless, ICSID tribunals have ruled that the term “to recommend” has the same
meaning as the term “to order.’’'”> The Maffezini tribunal considered that the difference
is more apparent than real and that the authority of the tribunal to rule on provisional
measures “‘is no less binding than that of a final award.”!”° One reason could be that the
parties are under an obligation to conduct themselves so as to avoid rendering the
award impossible of execution.!”” The Tokios Tokeles tribunal further “recalled that,
according to a well-established principle laid down by the jurisprudence of the ICSID
tribunals, provisional measures ‘recommended’ by an ICSID tribunal are legally
compulsory; they are in effect ‘ordered’ by the tribunal, and the parties are under a
legal obligation to comply with them.”!” This approach was reiterated by the Perenco
tribunal.'”

174 Aron Broches, Chairman of the Legal Committee, II (2) History or THE ICSID CONVENTION
813.

175 Maffezini, para. 9. In the same vein, Article 41 of the ICJ Statute states that the ICJ indicates
measures. The ICJ decided in its judgment LaGrand Case in 2001 that its orders have a binding
effect, albeit in a different jurisdictional context. The Court stated: “It follows from the object
and purpose of the Statute, as well as from the terms of Article 41 when read in their context,
that the power to indicate provisional measures entails that such measures should be binding,
inasmuch as the power in question is based on the necessity, when the circumstances call for
it, to safeguard, and to avoid prejudice to, the rights of the parties as determined by the final
judgment of the Court. The contention that provisional measures indicated under Article 41
might not be binding would be contrary to the object and purpose of that Article.” Judgment of
June 27, 2001, para. 102, I.C.J. Reports 2001, p. 466.

176 Maffezini, para. 9.

177. Lawrence Collins, Provisional and Protective Measures in International Litigation, 234 RECUEIL
DES couRS 218 (1992-IIT) [hereinafter L. Collins].

178 Tokios Tokeles, Order No. 1, para. 4.

179 Perenco, paras. 67—76 referring to the above cases and to Occidental, para. 58, City Oriente (“it
is the Tribunal’s decision that the word ‘recommend’ is equal in value to the word ‘order.”
Decision on Provisional Measures, italics in the original, para. 52) and to Spyridon Roussalis
v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/01, Decision on provisional measures, July 2, 2009,
unreported, para. 21 cited in Zannis Mavrogordato and Gabriel Sidere, The Nature and
Enforceability of ICSID Provisional Measures, (2009) 75 ARBITRATION 1, p.42. See for a critical
approach, CHESTER BRown, A CoMMON LAw OF INTERNATIONAL ADJUDICATION (OUP 2007), who
considers that the above mentioned decisions by relying on ICJ’s cases “thus represent a dra-
matic example of how common features in the practice of international courts with respect to

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 545

20-Yannaca-20.indd 545 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

It is beyond doubt, however, that a recommendation under Arbitration Rule 39
cannot be enforced through the ICSID Convention since it does not qualify as a final
award.'®° Section 6 of the ICSID Convention, which deals with recognition and
enforcement, indeed only concerns awards as defined by the Convention. Moreover,
the beneficiary of the measures is not allowed to seek enforcement of the measure
before a domestic court during the course of the proceedings as a result of Article 26
of the ICSID Convention.

Nevertheless, one should not underestimate the authority attached to a recommen-
dation of an ICSID tribunal. It is undoubtedly at least morally binding upon the parties,
not to speak of tactical considerations inciting a party not to disregard directions given
by persons who will ultimately decide on the merits. In addition, a tribunal can draw
adverse inferences from the non compliance with its recommendations.!*' It is indeed
beyond cavil that a tribunal can take into account the behavior of the parties and their
failure to observe the provisional measures in its final award.!*

Modification or revocation of the measures. Pursuant to Arbitration Rule 39(4), an
ICSID tribunal may at any time modify or revoke the measures, after giving each party
an opportunity of presenting observations.!*? Such power reflects the provisional char-
acter of the measures. Indeed, by nature, interim relief is temporary but the duration of
the validity of the measure can extend over the entire duration of the proceedings. In
that respect, one could consider that there is a general duty of the parties to inform the
tribunal of any changes in the circumstances that were relevant at the time of the grant-
ing of the measures. This duty would be the corollary of the absence of any limitation
of the period for which the measure is granted.

a procedural issue can do more than merely fill a gap or influence the interpretation of an
ambiguous provision. Rather, a common practice with respect to a question of procedure can
even prevail over a clearly expressed provision in a constitutive instrument, such as that in
article 47 of the ICSID Convention.” p. 150.

180 In passing, one should note that the ICSID Convention does not recognise the concept of
interim award that could be enforced while the proceedings are not terminated yet.

181 See Aron Broches in II (1) History oF THE ICSID Convention 815; Note B to Arbitration Rule
of 1968, 1 ICSID Reports 99.

182. Agip v. Congo, 311; MINE, Decision on Provisional Measures, December 4, 1985. See also
Pey Casado, para. 24. This principle was also acknowledged by a tribunal constituted under the
ASEAN Agreement for the Promotion and Protection of Investments 1987, Yaung Choo
Trading v. Myanmar, Procedural Order, February 27, 2002, 8 ICSID Reports 2005, p. 456. The
tribunal rejected a request for presentation of evidence but stated “in any event, the Tribunal
could draw reference from the nonproduction of evidence.”

183. Or in the words of the Pey Casado tribunal, “provisional measures, which are provisional by
nature and by definition (as the Respondent has observed), can be modified or cancelled at any
time by the Tribunal, do not benefit from the force of res judicata, will only last for the duration
of the proceedings and automatically fall if the Tribunal decides that it lacks jurisdiction to
decide the case” (para. 14). See also SGS v. Pakistan, Procedural Order No. 2, October 16,
2002. For an example of a request for revocation that was dismissed, see Citv Oriente, Decision
on Revocation.

546 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 546 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

Additional Facility cases

Nature of the decision. By contrast to ICSID Convention cases, an arbitral tribunal
constituted under the AF Rules renders an “order” when it rules on interim relief requested
by a party and makes a recommendation when it does so on its own initiative.

The recognition and enforcement of decisions rendered by a tribunal established
pursuant to the AF Rules does not follow the regime of the ICSID Convention. AF
decisions are enforceable through the regular mechanisms. This said, whether proce-
dural orders may be enforced under the New York Convention is debated. The majority
view is that the New York Convention applies only to awards. Enforcement is subject
to more favorable provisions of domestic law, such as, for example, Section 1041(2) of
the German ZPO or Article 183(2) of the Swiss PIL Act.'** It follows that an AF order
could be enforced by a local court in accordance with the procedural requirements of
local law. Doubts may remain about the enforcement of a simple recommendation.
However, no AF tribunal appears to have issued a recommendation so far.

Modification or revocation of the measures. Pursuant to Article 46(3) of the AF
Arbitration Rules, a tribunal can modify or revoke its order or recommendation after
giving each party an opportunity of presenting its observations.

NAFTA Proceedings

In proceedings conducted pursuant to NAFTA Chapter 11, the tribunal may “order” an
interim measure. Article 1134 specifies in its last sentence that “[f]or purposes of this
paragraph, an order includes a recommendation.” This was allegedly meant to ensure
“that interim measures have the same effect in NAFTA Chapter 11 proceedings
governed by the ICSID Convention as in proceedings governed by the UNCITRAL or
ICSID (Additional Facility) Arbitration Rules.”'® Concerns regarding enforcement
similar to those just reviewed will arise here as well.

UNCITRAL Rules

Nature of the decision. Pursuant to Article 26(2) of the 1976 version of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, a tribunal may render an order or an interim award.'*®
The possibility of issuing an interim award was included in order to attempt to facilitate

184 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER & ANTONIO R1GOzZZI, ARBITRAGE INTERNATIONAL: DROIT ET PRATIQUE
A LA LUMIERE DE LA LDIP 260 (Berne/Zurich 2006) with citations. See generally on this matter,
Donald F. Donovan, Provisional Measures: Proposals for Moving Forward, ICCA Congress
series no. 11, London 2002, pp. 132-149, and Andrea Carlevaris, Enforcement of Interim
Measures in International Arbitration, in 9 YEARBOOK OF PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL Law 503
(2007).

185 M. Kinnear et al., 6-1134.

186 See Perenco on how the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal also issues requests, instead of orders, in its
interim awards, thus imposing provisional measures that it regards as binding (paras. 71—73).

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 547

20-Yannaca-20.indd 547 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

the enforcement of the measures. Nonetheless, the same question arises here in terms
of enforcement as for an order rendered under the AF Rules or NAFTA Article 1134.
Indeed, the label on the decision will not modify its true nature, which is decisive for
enforcement purposes.

As a consequence, draft Article 26 only refers to orders. Under the draft Rules, an
UNCITRAL arbitral tribunal could thus not order interim measures in the form of an
award. It was indeed submitted that there was no purpose in issuing interim awards on
provisional measures given that the revised version of the UNCITRAL Model Law
contained express provisions permitting the enforcement of interim measures regard-
less of the form in which they are ordered.!*’ Indeed, Article 17H of the Model Law
provides for the enforcement of an interim measure issued by an arbitral tribunal except
if very few limited grounds for refusal of recognition or enforcement are met. In addi-
tion, the Working Group noted that “issuing an interim measure in the form of an
award could create confusion particularly in light of article 26(5) [preliminary order]
which permitted the arbitral tribunal to modify or suspend an interim measure.”’'** Be
this as it may and pending the adoption of Article 17 of the amended Model Law by
national legislators, the enforcement of an order granted by an UNCITRAL tribunal is
far from evident and would follow the same regime as an order rendered under the AF
Rules or NAFTA Article 1134.

Draft Article 26(9) provides for the applicant’s possible liability for costs and
damages if the tribunal later determines that the measures should not have been granted.
This provision mirrors Article 17G of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Model Law. It was
noted that this paragraph “might have the effect that a party requesting an interim mea-
sure be liable to pay costs and damages in situations where, for instance, the conditions
of draft article 26 had been met but the requesting party lost the arbitration.’’!®
However, it appears from the discussions at the time of the adoption of Article 17G
that the final decision on the merits is not an essential element in determining whether
the interim measure should have been granted.!”°

Modification or revocation of the measures. An arbitral tribunal may review or
alter the interim relief ordered if the circumstances or the progress of the arbitral pro-
ceedings so require. Strictly speaking, given that an UNCITRAL tribunal cannot act
proprio motu, it 1s not supposed to modify, suspend, or terminate the measure on its
own initiative. The draft Rules modify this and allow a tribunal to act not only upon
the request of a party but also on its own initiative “in exceptional circumstances and
upon prior notice to the parties.” Any modification, suspension, or termination of the
measure could be effected by a subsequent order.

If the interim relief had initially been granted not by way of an order but in the form
of an interim award as provided in the 1976 version of Article 26(2), any reconsideration

187. Report of the Working Group on the work of its 47th Session, Vienna, September 10-14, 2007,
A/CN.9/641, para. 51.

188  Ibid., para. 51.

189 Report of the Working Group on the work of its 50th Session, New York, February 9-13, 2009,
A/CN.9/669, para. 116; Note A/CN.9/WG.II/WP..154.Add.1, para. 32

199 Note A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.154.Add.1, para. 32.

548 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 548 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

may arguably infringe the principle of res judicata. This difficulty will no longer exist
under the draft Rules, since the latter only provide for interim relief by way of proce-
dural orders.

CONCURRENT JURISDICTION OF DOMESTIC COURTS

Can a party seek interim relief from domestic courts, for example, if the tribunal is not
yet constituted or if it is constituted but has no jurisdiction to grant the requested mea-
sures, or when a measure is directed at a third party, or a court-ordered measure is
deemed more efficient?

ICSID Convention Proceedings

Interim relief under the ICSID Convention proves to be specific when it comes to the
interaction with local courts. As already mentioned, Article 26 of the ICSID
Convention provides that, unless otherwise stated, consent to ICSID arbitration is
given to the exclusion of any other remedy. It was debated whether this exclusion
applied to interim relief.'”' As indicated, the tribunal in MJNE recommended, in clear
contrast to the tribunal in Atlantic Triton, that the respondent withdraw and terminate
any proceedings in connection with provisional measures pending in national
courts.

In 1984, Arbitration Rule 39(6) (formerly Rule 39(5)) was introduced to clarify that,
except when otherwise stipulated, the parties waive their right to seek interim mea-
sures of protection in domestic courts, whether before or after the institution of the
ICSID proceedings. For this rule not to apply, the parties must have stipulated so in the
agreement recording their consent, namely in the arbitration clause, be it in a con-
tract!** or in a treaty. An illustration of such a stipulation in an IAA can be found in
NAFTA Article 1121 (see below). Arbitration Rule 39(6) is a further illustration of the
insulated nature of ICSID proceedings.

Additional Facility Rules

By contrast, Article 46 of the AF Arbitration Rules expressly authorizes the parties to
request assistance from local courts to obtain interim relief. Article 46(4) specifies

191 See A. Parra, p. 37. Some authors suggested that since an ICSID tribunal can only recommend
measures, “the Contracting States did not intend to deprive national courts of the power to
prescribe provisional measures” in L. Collins, p. 99. See also on this issue C. Brower and
R. Goodman, op. cit.

192 The parties can for example insert in their agreement ICSID Model Clause 14, which reads as
follows: “Without prejudice to the power of the Arbitral Tribunal to recommend provisional
measures, either party hereto may request any judicial or other authority to order any provi-
sional or conservatory measure, including attachment, prior to the institution of the arbitration
proceeding, or during the proceeding, for the preservation of its rights and interests.”

INTERIM RELIEF IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 549

20-Yannaca-20.indd 549 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
Sup UNCORRECTED PROOF - FINAL, 12/03/2010, GLYPH

that, by doing so, the parties are not infringing upon the agreement to arbitrate or
affecting the powers of the tribunal. This feature has been explained by the absence of
an insulated mechanism in the AF Rules and the fact that AF arbitration is generally
subject to a national legal order.'”°

UNCITRAL Rules

Similarly, Article 26(3) of the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and draft Article
26(10) allow the parties to seek interim relief from domestic courts. Such action is not
seen as a breach or waiver of the agreement to arbitrate.

NAFTA Proceedings

Parties to NAFTA proceedings governed by the UNCITRAL Rules or the ICSID AF
Rules can seek interim relief from domestic courts. Article 1134 does not contain any
specific guidance in this respect. However, Article 1121 (entitled “Conditions Precedent
to Submission of a Claim to Arbitration”) complements the existing arbitration rules
and limits the nature of the relief sought and the courts from which such relief may be
requested. It states that, by consenting to arbitration under Chapter 11, a party (an
investor on its behalf or on behalf of an enterprise) waives its right to resort to domes-
tic courts “except for proceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary
relief, not involving the payment of damages, before an administrative tribunal or court
under the law of the disputing Party.”

CONCLUSION

The scope of the interim relief available in the context of investor-state disputes is
broad enough to meet the parties’ legitimate needs for temporary protection, subject to
limitations which may be found in a relevant treaty, such as the one contained in
NAFTA Article 1134, barring attachment or enjoining actions alleged to constitute a
breach of NAFTA protections. This said, applicants are faced with a high threshold
when seeking to establish that the interim relief requested is urgent and needed. This
may explain the reluctance of the vast majority of the tribunals to grant interim relief
in the context of investor-state arbitration, whether in the ICSID system or under the
UNCITRAL Rules. Indeed, most tribunals seem to have rejected the requested mea-
sures with the recent exceptions of City Oriente, Perenco, and Burlington, as well as
Paushok. Whether these recent developments signal a change in attitude of tribunals
toward more leniency in the assessment of the requirements for interim relief remains
to be seen.

193 A. Parra, p. 40.

550 GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER AND AURELIA ANTONIETTI

20-Yannaca-20.indd 550 ® 2/11/2010 5:11:04 PM
