Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

Keller, Wendler: Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? - An SchiedsVZ
Overview of ICSID Case Law 2011, 183

Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? — An Overview of
ICSID Case Law

By Dr. Moritz Keller, LL.M. and Carsten Wendler Lopez, LL.M., Frankfurt/Cologne*

The relevance of provisional measures in international investment arbitration has
significantly increased over the last years. Tribunals are often requested to decide over
essential issues prior to rendering their final award. As is true for any issue in
international investment arbitration, the law is developing fast. So far, the standard for
provisional measures seems to be unsettled. This essay examines the recent ICSID case
law in order to shed some light on the different approaches and new developments. In
particular, this contribution studies the requirements for provisional measures and the

rights that can be protected.

Die Bedeutung von einstweiligen MaBnahmen in der internationalen
Investitionsschiedsgerichtbarkeit hat entscheidend zugenommen. Schiedsgerichte
werden immer haufiger angerufen, um Uber wichtige Sachverhalte noch vor Erlass des
Schiedsspruches zu entscheiden. Charakteristisch fur die internationale
Investitionsschiedsgerichtbarkeit, schreitet auch hier die Entwicklung schnell voran,
wobei noch Uneinigkeit uber die Anforderungen fur den Erlass von einstweiligen
MaBnahmen zu bestehen scheint. Dieser Artikel untersucht die jungsten ICSID
Schiedsspriiche, um die verschiedenen Ansatze zu durchleuchten. Dabei erforscht der
Beitrag insbesondere die Voraussetzungen fiir einstweilige MaBnahmen sowie die

Rechte, die durch solche geschutzt werden konnen.
I. Introduction

Investment arbitration proceedings tend to go on for several years and, at the same time, usually
deal with issues of financial and sometimes also political importance. It is only natural that some of
the issues between the parties will need to be decided prior to the Tribunal rendering the final
award. While more and more requests for provisional measures have become public as investment
arbitration is becoming increasingly popular, the requirements for such provisional measures do not

appear to be agreed upon.

Keller, Wendler: Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? -

An Overview of ICSID Case Law(SchiedsVZ 2011, 183) 184
Although it is established ICSID1 case law that a Tribunal can recommend provisional measures
where the requested measures are necessary and urgent to protect the rights in dispute, these
requirements are far from being interpreted unanimously. A prominent example is the question
whether the harm that provisional measures are meant to prevent must be irreparable or (merely)
significant. A trilogy of recent ICSID cases abandoned the standard of irreparable harm in order to
establish necessity2. In addition, a recent decision rendered under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules3
also developed a broader interpretation of the powers available to a Tribunal to grant provisional
measures and applied a more flexible standard based on “very substantial prejudice” as opposed to
harm not reparable by damages4. Nevertheless, the Cemex v. Venezuelas Tribunal was

unimpressed by the development and returned to the standard of irreparable harm.

These new events provide fuel to the debate on the appropriate standard for provisional measures.

The aim of this article is to shed some light on the new development on provisional measures and

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
1 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

to offer some thought provoking impulse. Addressing the unsolved issues, ICSID Tribunals often
relied on case law of the International Court of Justice (ICJ), the principles derived therefrom and
on other international arbitration cases such as cases decided by the US-Iran Claims Tribunal or
under the UNCITRAL Rules. Since this article focuses on ICSID arbitration, reference to the ICJ or
other arbitration rules will be made when appropriate along the analysis, rather than providing an

outline of such development separately.

This essay is structured as follows: First, the different approaches to the requirements for a
recommendation of provisional measures will be analyzed on the basis of the applicable provisions
(II.). Subsequently, the binding nature and enforcement of a decision on provisional measures are

addressed (III.), before a short summary concludes the article (IV.).
II. Requirements for Provisional Measures under ICSID Case Law

The framework for provisional measures in ICSID proceedings is laid out in Art. 476 of the ICSID
Convention7 and Rule 398 of the ICSID Arbitration Rulesg. As follows from the wording of Art. 47 of
the ICSID Convention “any provisional measure” might be recommended by the Arbitral Tribunal
sua sponte or on request by the parties. Rule 39 of the ICSID Rules does not narrow the Tribunal's
discretion in its wording. Any Tribunal thus - after having assumed prima facie jurisdiction to hear
the case (1.) -— has to consider that the circumstances require such provisional measures to be
granted (2.). Another requirement follows from the wording of Art. 47 of the ICSID Convention that

provisional measures “should be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party"(3).
1. Prima Facie Jurisdiction

Parties in past and present proceedings repeatedly raised jurisdictional objections stating that the
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear the case on the merits and would thus consequently not have

jurisdiction to issue a recommendation for provisional measures.

Most Tribunals have pointed out — in line with IC) jurisprudenceio — that a Tribunal does not need
to be convinced that it has jurisdiction to hear the case on the merits to issue a recommendation
for provisional measures, but that prima facie jurisdiction shall suffice11. In Pey Casado v. Chile,

the Tribunal emphasized

Keller, Wendler: Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? -

An Overview of ICSID Case Law(SchiedsVZ 2011, 183) Mats
that the preliminary examination by the Secretary-General under Article 36 of the ICSID
Convention would usually establish prima facie jurisdiction alreadyi2. However, most Tribunals did
conduct their own analysis on whether prima facie jurisdiction existed13. In doing so the Tribunals
analyzed the request for arbitration in order to find an indication for the parties agreement to
arbitrate. For instance, in Burlington v. Ecuador and Occidental v. Ecuador the Tribunals referred to
the relevant arbitration clause in order to conclude that prima facie jurisdiction was established14.
In Perenco v. Ecuador, besides referring to the arbitration clause of the BIT, the Tribunal also
considered the definitions of investment, investor and nationality, and briefly analyzed the consent
of the investoris5. The Tribunal in Quiborax v. Bolivia even clarified that on the date the Request for
Arbitration was filed and registered by the ICSID Secretariat, Bolivia was still a signatory to the
ICSID Conventionié.

2. Circumstances that Require Provisional Measures

If the Tribunal has assumed jurisdiction to recommend provisional measures, it will then scrutinize

whether the circumstances of the case require provisional measures. A coherent body of case law

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
2 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

providing what is needed to establish “circumstances that require provisional measures” is — as of
today — nowhere to be seen. Within the drafting sessions of the ICSID Rules several calls for the
implementation of cautionary yet clarifying requirements such as “compelling reasons",

“exceptional cases” or “absolute necessity” did not succeed17.

It appears, nevertheless, that most Tribunals agree that “provisional measures are extraordinary
measures which should not be recommended lightly"18. Tribunals rely unanimously on the
requirement of urgency and necessity of the provisional measuresi9. Opinions, however, differ

when it comes to fill both requirements with life2o.
a) Urgency and Necessity of Provisional Measures

For a start, Tribunals do not always distinguish between urgency and necessity. In fact, many

Tribunals mingle both criteria21.
aa) Urgency

Article 47 of the Convention fails to give a Tribunal guidance on how to apply the standard. Hence,
Tribunals have relied on the jurisprudence of the ICJ in order to define urgency. In the words of the
ICJ the requirement of urgency is met when “there is a real risk that action prejudicial to the rights
of either party might be taken before the Court has given its final decision"22. Following this line of
reasoning ICSID Tribunals found, generally speaking, a provisional measure urgent as soon as the

decision over such measure could not wait until the final award23.

Note that the degree of urgency may depend on the circumstances of the case, in particular, on the

nature

Keller, Wendler: Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? -

An Overview of ICSID Case Law(SchiedsVZ 2011, 183) 186
of the requested measure24. Thus, there might even be circumstances where the situation is urgent
by definition. The City Oriente v. Ecuador25 Tribunal, for instance, held that where “the issue is to
protect the jurisdictional powers of the Tribunal and the integrity of the arbitration and the final
award, then the urgency requirement is met by the own very nature of the issue"26. The Burlington
Tribunal confirmed that “when the measures are intended to protect against the aggravation of the
dispute during the proceedings, the urgency requirement is fulfilled by definition"27. This was, in a
similar manner, confirmed for the duty to protect the procedural integrity by the Quiborax

Tribunalzs.
bb) Necessity

To establish whether necessity is given, ICSID case law relies on a risk assessment. In the words of
the Cemex Tribunal necessity requires an “assessment of the risk of damage which provisional
measures are intended to avert’29. At the same time, the question of the precise test to be fulfilled
to establish necessity remains unsettled since the nature of the relevant harm might be interpreted
differently. Hence, some Tribunals have required “irreparable harm” while other Tribunals have
relied on a further weighing of interests and were satisfied with harm that was not irreparable but

(merely) significant to come to a finding of necessity.
(a) The Standard of Irreparable Harm

A majority of ICISD Tribunals have referred to the requirement of irreparable harm when analyzing

necessity30.

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
3 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

(aa) The Requirement of Irreparable Harm

The Tribunal in Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine31, relying on jurisprudence from the ICJ, pointed out that
measures are necessary “where the actions of a party are capable of causing or of threatening
irreparable prejudice to the rights invoked"32. Applying this standard, the Tribunal negated that the
Ukraine's tax investigations or criminal proceedings against the Claimant's founder and key
manager did indeed constitute a case of necessity33. In Plama v. Bulgaria34, the Tribunal was asked
to grant provisional measures ordering to discontinue all pending proceedings before Bulgarian
Courts and Bulgarian authorities. In its analysis, it adopted the notion stated in Tokios Tokelés and
held that “/t/he need for provisional measures must be urgent and necessary to preserve the status

quo or avoid the occurrence of irreparable harm or damage"35.

In Occidental, the Claimants sought reinstatement of their rights and indemnification for all
damages after the Respondent terminated agreements for the exploration and exploitation of an oil
field. In its reasoning, the Tribunal confirmed the requirement of an irreparable harm36 and
established that such future harm must be imminent and not merely “potential or hypothetical"37.
Moreover, the Tribunal clarified that such irreparable harm standard would not only refer to the risk

of harm with respect to the applicant but to both parties.

In the latest ICSID case dealing with provisional measures, the CEMEX Tribunal refers to the ICSID
case law and acknowledges that “/t/raditionally, ICSID Arbitral Tribunals [...] base their decision on
the criteria of irreparable harm or damage"3s. After analysing the most recent ICSID awards on
provisional measures39, “the Tribunal sees no reason not to retain the generally accepted standard
of ‘irreparable harm’ as criterion for the ‘necessity’ required by Article 47 of the ICSID

Convention"40.
(bb) The Meaning of Irreparable Harm

Although the mentioned Tribunals consistently refer to the term “irreparable harm” in order to find
necessity, the question remains what “irreparable” really encompasses. Mostly, Tribunals have

considered whether the imminent harm could be compensated by an award of damages.

The findings of the Metalclad v. Mexico41 Tribunal shed some light on the meaning: It found that a
provisional measure may only be granted if it is required to protect the applicant's rights from “an
injury that cannot be made good by subsequent payment of damages”"42. The Tribunal rejected a
declaration that the Claimant shall refrain from providing information about the proceedings to the
public, since the Tribunal could not find any prejudice to the Respondent's rights, “Jet alone serious

or irreversible damage"43. In Plama,

Keller, Wendler: Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? -

An Overview of ICSID Case Law(SchiedsVZ 2011, 183) 187
the Tribunal confirmed that harm was not irreparable if it could be compensated by payment of
damages44. The Tribunal accordingly found that the Claimant could be compensated for any
consequences of the various pending proceedings before Bulgarian Courts and Bulgarian
authorities. Hence, the Tribunal rejected to recommend provisional measures to discontinue the
mentioned parallel proceedings. The Tribunal in Occidenta/ provided additional foundation for the
analysis by the Metalclad and Plama Tribunals: The Tribunal held that the mitigation of damages is
not the principal objective for provisional measures, since in such case provisional measures would
be necessary in almost any case45. In the view of the Tribunal the harm in such case “/s only more
damages, and this is the harm of a type which can be compensated by monetary compensation, so

there is neither necessity nor urgency to grant a provisional measure to prevent such harm'"46.

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
4 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

Most recently, the Tribunal in CEMEX confirmed the notion that when the harm can be compensated
by a damage award, then such harm is not “irreparable”and there can be “neither necessity, nor
urgency to grant the requested provisional measures"47. In this case, the Claimants argued that
the seizure of three oil vessels, which were previously owned by CEMEX Venezuela, would lead to
“an additional loss of almost $50 millions beyond what is currently being claimed in the
arbitration"48. However, the Tribunal found that such circumstances could only amount to a
financial loss, which “could be readily compensated by a damages award”49. Hence, the Tribunal
rejected the request to order the Respondent to cease any seizure of former assets of CEMEX

Venezuela, including the three oil vessels.

Note that for a long time it seemed that such high standard could hardly be met. In one of the
latest ICSID cases dealing with provisional measures, the Quiborax Tribunal found the irreparable
harm standard met by holding that the “harm caused to the integrity of the ICSID proceedings,
particularly with respect to a party's access to evidence or integrity of the evidence could not be
remedied by an award of damages"50. In the view of the Tribunal, the criminal proceedings initiated
by Bolivia limited Quiborax' access to evidence by sequestering the corporate records and by
exercising undue pressure against potential witnesses. It appears as if the standard is more likely
to be met when the harm goes beyond the investment and the relevant potential loss in fact

threatens the proceedings.

The question arises, in any event, under which specific circumstances the standard of irreparable
harm would be fulfilled. Since an investor could arguably even be compensated for the destruction
of an investment, it remains unclear where to draw the line. The CEMEX Tribunal has, nevertheless,
seen the destruction of an investment, an ongoing concern, as a situation in which an investor

could not be compensated for the loss suffereds51.
(b) Significant harm by weighing of interests

Recently and most notably three ICSID Tribunals rejected the “irreparable harm”standard. All three
cases have been brought on the basis of individual contracts and not on the basis of BITs. The facts
of the cases are very similar. The Claimants are oil companies who entered into oil production
share contracts with Ecuador to explore and exploit oil fields on Ecuadorian territory. After the
conclusion of the contracts, Ecuador introduced new laws and decrees imposing taxes (first 50%,
then 99%) on revenues from the exploration and exploitation of oil fields, thereby obliging the
respective Claimants to pay an additional share of their profits to Ecuador, contrary to the parties’
contractual agreement. The Claimants challenged the taxation in arbitration proceedings based on
the contracts still in force while operations were still ongoing. In addition, the Claimants requested
provisional measures ordering Ecuador to refrain from demanding payment and enforcing the new

tax law. All three Tribunals finally recommended provisional measures.

In the first of the three cases, City Oriente, the Tribunal found that a requirement that provisional
measures can be ordered only as a means to prevent irreparable harm follows neither from the
wording of Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules nor of Art. 47 of the ICSID Conventions2. The
Tribunal emphasized that the only requirement arising from the wording of Rule 39 was that of
urgencys3. Although the Tribunal confirmed that provisional measures were not to be ordered
lightly, it refused to apply the irreparable harm standard and introduced a weighing of interests in
order to assess whether the harm is “significant and [...] it exceeds greatly the damage caused to
the party affected thereby”54. In the view of the Tribunal such balancing would consist of a “careful
consideration of the interests at stake, weighing the harm spared the petitioner and the damage
inflicted on the other party’55. Having in mind that the main relief sought by the Claimant was

specific contract performance, the Tribunal saw a high risk that the contract may be terminated by

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
5 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

Ecuador thereby prejudicing the enforcement of a final award. In addition, it found that the sums
claimed by Ecuador might at this stage of the proceedings exceed Claimant's financial capabilities,

a harm it found more serious than the potential delay of payment to Ecuadorse.

In Perenco, the Tribunal acknowledged that most authorities recognized the standard of irreparable

loss

Keller, Wendler: Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? -

An Overview of ICSID Case Law(SchiedsVZ 2011, 183) Mee
and that, where the caused loss cannot be compensated by an award of damages, the requirement
is likely to be fulfilled. However, the Tribunal emphasized that the test does not follow from Article
47 and accordingly rejected to apply the standards7. The Tribunal came to the conclusion that a
seizure of the Claimant's assets could jeopardise the Claimant's ability to proceed with the
investment. It underlined that, if Perenco's business would come to an end, “such injury could not
[...] be adequately compensated by an award of damages should its claim be ultimately upheld"ss.
Thus, even though the Tribunal rejected the irreparable harm test, it appears as if the facts
nevertheless fulfilled such standard. One important consideration in order to distinguish the case
from Occidental was - as in City Oriente - that the relevant contract was not terminated for which
reason the Claimant based its claim on specific contract performances9. It seems that the Tribunal
also focused on protecting the ongoing investment and on apprehending “that Perenco's business in

Ecuador would be crippled, if not destroyed"6o.

The Burlington Tribunal also rejected the standard of irreparable harm and referred to the standard
of “harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages” used by the UNCITRAL Model Lawéi.
In order to assess necessity the Tribunal introduced the balancing of “the degree of harm the
applicant would suffer but for the measure"62. Moreover, the Tribunal also emphasized that it would
“weigh the interests of both sides in assessing necessity"63. Once more the Tribunal found that the
situation of having a contract in force was distinguishable from Occidental since the risk of harm
was not only more damages but the “destruction of an ongoing investment and of its revenue
producing potential which benefits both the investor and the State’64. Thus, it recognized the risk
of losses, which could lead to the cessation of the ongoing operation. Hence, the Tribunal came to
the conclusion that “adequately structured” provisional measures were in the interest of both

parties65 and recommended the establishment of an escrow accountéé.

The approach adopted by the Tribunal in the recent case of Railroad Development Corporation
(RDC) v. Guatemala67 was somewhat different but still in the same line of reasoning. The Tribunal
arrived at the conclusion that — since the ICSID Convention is silent on the requirements for an
ICSID Tribunal to recommend provisional measures — the applicable standard is one of
reasonablenessés. Thus, a Tribunal has to consider all circumstances of the request, specifically
taking into account the rights to be protected and their susceptibility to irreversible damages in
case provisional measures are not recommendedég. Applying the standard of reasonableness, the
Tribunal rejected to recommend provisional measures to preserve certain categories of documents
allegedly material for RDC's claim. In its opinion the request “would place an unfair burden on the
Government because of its excessive breadth and no need or urgency has been proven to justify

the recommendation"70.
(c) Flexible standard under UNCITRAL Rules

The recent UNCITRAL case Sergei Paushok v. Mongolia71 developed yet another approach. The

Tribunal found that “irreparable harm” in international law has a flexible meaning72. As in City

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
6 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

Oriente, Perenco and Burlington the investor challenged new tax laws impairing its investment a

profit tax of 68% on the amount exceeding the gold sales price of USD 500 per ounce.

Upfront, the Tribunal emphasized that the wording of the relevant provision under the UNCITRAL
Rules, i.e. Article 26(1), “leaves a wider discretion to the Tribunal in the awarding of provisional
measures (‘any interim measures it deems necessary in respect of the subject-matter of the
disputes’) than under Article 47 of the ICSID Rules (‘provisional measures for the preservation of
its rights’)"73. Acknowledging the approach in Occidental and Plama, the Paushok Tribunal rejected
the notion that the possibility of monetary compensation necessarily eliminates necessity for
provisional measures74. The Tribunal relied on the Behring Case of the U.S.-Iran Claims Tribunal
stating that in international law “irreparable prejudice” does not require that the harm be not
remediable by an award of damages75. By referring to Article 17A of the UNCITRAL Model Law the
Tribunal concluded “that [...] ‘irreparable harm’ in international law has a flexible meaning”. In the
view of the Tribunal, Article 17A does not require irreparable harm, but merely harm “not
adequately reparable by an award of damages"76. Applying this standard, the Tribunal came to the
conclusion that Claimants would face a “very substantial prejudice” in form of insolvency and thus a

complete loss of the investment77. In the opinion of the Tribunal

Keller, Wendler: Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? -

An Overview of ICSID Case Law(SchiedsVZ 2011, 183) 189
this justifies provisional measures in form of suspending the payment of the profit tax although the
profit tax amounts merely to an aggravation of debts and recourse in damages remains available to

the Claimantsz7s.
b) Proportionality

It is noteworthy that, in one way or the other, some Tribunals tend to rely on some form of
proportionality when granting provisional measures. When the standard consists of weighing the
interests at stake and balancing the harms inflicted on both parties, such proportionality is included
in the applied standard79. In other cases, proportionality amounts to an extra test in order to

assure that granting provisional measures does not lead to unreasonable resultsso.
c) Conclusion

Bearing in mind that in international arbitration the doctrine of stare decisis is not applicable and
there exists no power of precedent as such, a common approach to provisional measures has not
yet been developed. Some Tribunals raise the bar higher than others: While most ICSID Tribunals
still tend to apply the irreparable harm standard, there has been a visible tendency to slightly
deviate from the standard: A few recent ICSID Tribunals rejected the standard in order to protect
an ongoing investment. The two most recent ICSID decisions on provisional measures CEMEX and
Quiborax could have been the turning point for the potential development of a common approach to
provisional measures. While both considered the different standards, both Tribunals nevertheless
applied the irreparable harm test, thereby leaving the question to the future development of case

law.

The CEMEX Tribunal - while examining the new approaches established in Burlington, Perenco and
Paushok - emphasized that even in the cases where the test of irreparable harm was rejected, the
facts of the cases nevertheless met such test, for which reason it insisted on the standard. In

Quiborax, the Tribunal seemed to be reluctant to take a stance. While it acknowledged the Parties

disagreement whether the harm must be “serious or irreparable"s1, it merely stated that

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
7 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

“irreparable harm is harm that cannot be repaired by an award of damages"32. This appears to be
the language of the standard, but the Tribunal refers to Art. 17A of the UNCITRAL Model Law and

bases its interpretation on exactly those ICSID Tribunals who actually rejected the standards3.

It can be observed that the essential difference between both groups of cases is whether there is a
threat to an ongoing investment or the proceedings. Where the investment is still ongoing,
significant weight should be given to protecting such investment through provisional measures,
while after the termination of an investment, monetary damages will likely suffices4. In addition,
Tribunals will not accept any obstruction of the proceedings. While emphasizing the factual
circumstances and in particular the question whether the investment is still a going concern will be
of significant importance, the question remains whether the “right” abstract definition of the

required standard of harm is in fact rather of theoretical relevance.

To answer this question, one would need a crystal ball: The decisive issue will be, how the
Tribunals will apply the different standards in practice, in particular the standard of irreparable
harm. One could, for example, argue that even the destruction of an ongoing investment could be
reparable by damages. Further circumstances where it is likewise difficult to determine whether
harm is reparable by damages or not are easily imaginable. Is a lost investment opportunity
reparable by damages? It could be argued that the opportunity should be protected in the same
way an ongoing investment is protected. The given examples show that a clear and consistent test

for necessity could provide helpful guidance for parties, counsel and arbitrators alike.
3. Rights to be Preserved

Any analysis of the requirements of urgency and necessity needs to consider the right sought to be
preserved by the provisional measures. While the scope of protected rights seems reasonably clear,
the protection of the general right to non-aggravation of the dispute is a particularly prominent
topic of the discussion as is the protection of the exclusivity of ICSID arbitration. Moreover, ICSID
Tribunals have also come to different conclusions when dealing with the right to specific

performance of a contract.
a) General Scope

In general, the rights protected under Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules and Article 47 of the ICSID

Convention are meant to be those of the status quo, i.e. at that point in time existing rightsss.

The first Tribunal, which took a stand regarding the scope of the rights protected, was the Tribunal
in AMCO v. Indonesias6. The Tribunal decided that a provisional measure must affect the rights in
dispute and found that the publication of an article in a Hong Kong newspaper could not threaten

any right in disputes7. Finally, the Tribunal rejected to interfere with the publication of information.

The Tribunal in Maffezini v. Spainss adopted a more restrictive approach by demanding that the

request for

Keller, Wendler: Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? -

An Overview of ICSID Case Law(SchiedsVZ 2011, 183) 190
provisional measures relates to the subject matter of the case before the Tribunals9. In applying
this standard, the Maffezini Tribunal denied to impose a provisional measure in the form of a
recommendation to require the Claimant to provide a guarantee or a bond in the amount of the

costs expected to be incurred in the arbitration.

This restrictive approach appears to be too limited and has not been followed by subsequent

Tribunals90. Nowadays, most Tribunals apply the criterion adopted by the Plama Tribunal, i.e. the

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
8 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

right to be preserved must bear a relation with the dispute. The Tribunal held that “/.../ the rights
to be preserved by provisional measures are circumscribed by the requesting party's claims and
requests for relief. They may be general rights, such as the rights to due process or the right not to
have the dispute aggravated, but those general rights must be related to specific disputes in
arbitration [...]".91 In the past, measures recommended or rejected by Tribunals under the ICSID

Convention and Rules included measures relating to the:
preservation of evidence/production of documents92

e econfidentiality of the proceeding93

aggravation of the dispute94

e ethe right to have the ICSID arbitration be the exclusive remedy for the dispute under Art. 26 of
the ICSID Conventiongs

security for costs96

e ereinstatement of contractual terms of co-operation97

preservation of contractual terms in light of a new law and regulations9s
e erefrain from exercising a contractual right related to the dispute99
procedural integrity of the arbitration proceedings100

e eseizure of former assets of a party101.
b) General Right to Non-Aggravation of the Dispute

One right has specifically been the topic of debate: ICSID Tribunals repeatedly had to rule on
requests asking the opposing party to abstain from every act likely to aggravate the dispute or to

render the execution of the award more difficult.

While the existence of the right to non-aggravation of the dispute appears to be generally accepted
since the case of the Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgariaio2, the ICSID rulings differ
significantly. The exact requirements for a recommendation for provisional measures regarding the
right to non-aggravation of the dispute have apparently not yet been established103. The first
ICSID Tribunal, in Holiday Inns v. Morocco, affirmed the principle of non-aggravation of the dispute
for international investment arbitration1o4. In AMCO, the Tribunal confirmed “the good and fair
practical rule, according to which both Parties to a legal dispute should refrain, in their own
interest, to do anything that could aggravate or exacerbate the same, thus rendering its solution
possibly more difficult’105. Applying this standard to the facts the Tribunal found that an already
published newspaper article in Hong Kong bore no potential to aggravate or exacerbate the dispute
and rejected the requestio6. The Tribunal in Pey Casado, on the other hand, issued a
recommendation for provisional measures relying on several purely hypothetical situations
providing for risks of aggravation or extension of the dispute by the respective partiesio7. It
referred to the standard used by the International Court of Justice in the Ang/o-Iranian Oil
Company Case “that no action is taken which might prejudice the rights of the other Party in
respect of carrying out of [the judgement] which the [Arbitration Tribunal] may subsequently

render” and “that no action of any kind is taken which might aggravate or extend the dispute" 108.

In Plama, the Tribunal favoured a more limited standard and found that the parties should only be
protected against actions that would make the resolution of the dispute more difficult, but not

against actions

Keller, Wendler: Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? - 191

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
9 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

An Overview of ICSID Case Law(SchiedsVZ 2011, 183)

merely aggravating the dispute in a general sense109. The Tribunal was not satisfied that the
parallel bankruptcy proceeding would fulfil the requirementiio. Both the Tribunals in Burlington and
Quiborax considered the application of the standard adopted by Plama to be somewhat limited and
reaffirmed that an aggravation of the dispute arises where its solution becomes possibly more
difficulti11. The Burlington Tribunal issued provisional measures to protect the ongoing investment
and found that “it [is] most likely that the conflict will escalate and there is a risk that the

relationship between the foreign investor and Ecuador may come to an end’112.
c) Pending Parallel Proceedings v. Exclusivity of ICSID arbitration

ICSID Tribunals have often been requested to recommend provisional measures to preserve the

exclusivity of ICSID arbitration provided for in Article 26 of the ICSID Convention113.

Already in Holiday Inns, the Tribunal had to decide how to deal with parallel proceedings before
domestic courts114. Although the Tribunal did not recommend a provisional measure as such, it
invited both Parties “/.../ to abstain from any measure incompatible with the upholding of the
Contract and to make sure that the action already taken should not result in any consequences in
the future which would go against such upholding’115. In the case of SGS v. Pakistanii6, the
Tribunal issued a recommendation that Pakistan should not take any step to initiate a complaint for
contempt within court proceedings in Pakistan and, moreover, parallel arbitration proceedings in
Pakistan should be stayed until the ICSID Tribunal had decided on its jurisdictionii7. The Tribunal
in Tokios Tokelés issued a similar, though broader recommendation for provisional measures calling
for the parties to refrain from “any proceedings, judicial or other [...] which might prejudice the
rendering or implementing of an eventual decision or award of this Tribunal or aggravate the
exiting dispute [.../’118. In a later order, the Tokios Tokelés Tribunal, also extended the scope for
provisional measures stating that parallel proceedings may be subject to provisional measures,
even if they are “not part of the legal dispute arising directly out of the Claimant's investment’119.

The Tribunal emphasized that the action at issue had to be merely related to the subject matter120.

In contrast, the Tribunal in CSOB v. the Slovak Republici2z1 recommended the suspension of local
bankruptcy proceedings, since those domestic proceedings might have let to the determination of
issues that were subject matter of the ICSID arbitration122. As mentioned before, in Plama, the
Tribunal rejected to recommend the stay of bankruptcy proceedings as the parties were not
identical to the arbitration proceedings — the bankruptcy proceedings were brought by private
parties and not by the State123. The Tribunal emphasized that the subject matter of the parallel
proceedings were different from the one before the Tribunal, contrary to the CSOB case. Similarly,
the Tribunal in Pey Casado declined a request for provisional measures as the parties of the
domestic proceedings were not the same and thus the content of the proceedings was not
identicali24: The recent decision in Quiborax held that the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings
does not need to be protected if the issues fall outside the scope of ICSID125, thereby reaffirming

the limitation of the scope of provisional measures. Accordingly, the

Keller, Wendler: Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? -
An Overview of ICSID Case Law(SchiedsVZ 2011, 183) 192

Tribunal found the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings not threatened by criminal proceedings and

refrained from granting provisional measures in relation thereto126.

In any event, the mere fact that the exclusivity of ICSID arbitration proceedings is at stake will in

most cases be sufficient in itself to establish that provisional measures are necessary127. This would

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
10 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

also explain why early ICSID Tribunals did not focus on the requirements of urgency and necessity

when dealing with pending proceedings12s.

d) Specific Performance of Contracts

There is a general consensus, that the rights for which provisional measures can be invoked to
protect are not limited in any way129. Thus, contractual rights are - among other rights — generally
protected as well. However, with regard to the issue of specific performance of contractual rights,

existing case law has come to different conclusions.

aa) Protecting the Status Quo

Several Tribunals have argued that provisional measures can be employed solely for the protection
of rights and not for the enforcement of rightsi30. Recommendations sought shall, following this
line of reasoning, have the effect of maintaining the status quo. Hence, Tribunals have in the past
denied applications for provisional measures arguing that granting a recommendation would, in

effect, equal an order for specific performance of the contracti31.

In Occidental, the Claimants sought the protection of specific performance of a participation
contract for the exploration and exploitation of an oil field, which had been terminated by the
Respondent. In order to preserve their rights to specific performance, the Claimants requested
provisional measures in form of an advanced notice for any transfer to a third party of the
operation of the oil field at issue of the arbitration. The Tribunal denied the request on the basis
that the Claimants failed to establish such right prima facie. The Tribunal pointed out that specific
performance of a contract terminated by a State exercising its sovereignty must be deemed legally
impossible132. In addition, the Tribunal noted that a reinstatement of a foreign investor in its
concession after a termination by the State “would constitute a reparation disproportional to its

interference with the sovereignty of the State when compared to monetary compensation’133.

bb) No Restrictions on the Relief Sought

The Tribunal in City Oriente reached a different conclusion and issued provisional measures
ordering Ecuador to refrain from any action to collect the outstanding amounts of the new imposed
taxes disputed in the arbitration134. The Tribunal explicitly underlined that City Oriente had prima
facie a right to seek specific performance of a contract under Ecuadorian law and, thus, rebutted
Ecuador's argument that the decision actually protected a non-existing right under Ecuadorian
lawi35. Moreover, the Tribunal found that it did not anticipate the merits of the case and was
therefore not restrained from its decision by reasons of res judicata136. In addition, the Tribunal
noted that unlike the case before the Occidenta/ Tribunal, the City Oriente case had not been
brought under an investment treaty, but rather under Ecuadorian contract law1i37. Since the
contract was still in force, any finding of the Occidental Tribunal that performance of a contract
cannot be claimed if the contract was previously terminated by the State by virtue of its sovereign

powers thus was deemed irrelevant in City Oriente138.

Likewise, in the Burlington case the relevant contract was still in force, for which reason the
Tribunal found it “unnecessary to consider” the view that under international law the right to
specific performance is not available where a concession agreement has been terminated or
cancelled by a sovereign State139. The Tribunal referred to Article 35 of the ILC Articles on State
Responsibility and to a provision of the Ecuadorian Civil Code in order to show that international law

and Ecuadorian law provide for specific

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
11 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

Keller, Wendler: Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? -

An Overview of ICSID Case Law(SchiedsVZ 2011, 183) 193
performancei4o. Since the claim for specific performance was a contract claim and since the
contract was still being performed, the Tribunal found that prima facie a right to specific

performance might existi41 and moved on to examine the requirements of urgency and necessity.
e) Summary

It can be seen that in general all rights relating to the dispute can be protected by means of
provisional measures, while the scope of the right to non-aggravation of the dispute in particular is
a subject of debate between Tribunals. In addition, it remains unclear whether or not relief similar
to or amounting to the specific performance of a contract can be granted. The decisions do not
contradict themselves. The Tribunals concur that a right to specific performance of a contract might
exist in general, but that in each case a right to specific performance must be established prima
facie. Tribunals tend not to recognize the right to specific performance to a contract already
terminated by the State exercising its sovereignty, while they might arguably grant provisional

measures in case the contract is still in force.
III. Legally Binding and Enforceable

After the Tribunal has rendered a decision, the parties might need to enforce the decision on the
opposing party. The wording of Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID Rules
(“recommend” and “recommended” respectively as opposed to order) seems to indicate that a
decision is rather not legally binding142. The negotiation history of the ICSID Convention reveals
major difficulties by the drafters to agree upon a more binding language. As Schreuer has
emphasized “a conscious decision was made not to grant the tribunal the power to order binding

provisional measures"143.

In 1999, the Maffezini Tribunal took the position that a recommendation under Art. 47 of the ICSID
Convention is no less binding than a final award relying on the Spanish version of the Convention
which employs the term “dictacion” [ordering] of the provisional measuresi44. The Tribunal
acknowledged the semantic difference between the word ‘recommend’ and ‘order’, however, found
the difference “more apparent than real”. The decision has been followed by several other
Tribunalsi45, which could then also employ a decision by the ICJ on Article 41 of the ICJ statute
which is in large part identical to Article 47 of the ICSID Convention146. In the LaGrand Case
(Germany v. United States of America) the IC] found that provisional measures are —

notwithstanding the term “indicate” within Article 41 of the ICJ Statute - indeed binding:

“It follows from the object and purpose of the Statute, as well as from the terms of Article 41 when
read in their context, that the power to indicate provisional measures entails that such measures
should be binding, inasmuch as the power in question is based on the necessity, when the
circumstances call for it, to safeguard, and to avoid prejudice to, the rights of the parties as
determined by the final judgment of the Court. The contention that provisional measures indicated
under Article 41 might not be binding would be contrary to the object and purpose of that

Article”147.

By now, it appears to be well established in ICSID case law that recommendations are legally
compulsory and, as such, rather orders than recommendations in a literal sensei4s. Nevertheless,
since it is clear that a decision on provisional measures does not constitute an award149, the

provisions on enforcement of awards within the ICSID Convention do not apply, at least not

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
12 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

directly. Since established case law assumes that provisional measures are as binding as final
awards, it might be arguable that Article 54 should be applicable by analogy in order to obtain
recognition of the provisional measure before the relevant domestic courti50. Enforcement under
Article 54 on the other hand, even by analogy, appears impossible since the provision is limited to
the pecuniary obligation. However, so far no Tribunal has dealt with the problem of enforceability.
Hence, the question if and how a decision on provisional measures will be enforced remains open as

of todayi51. In practice, state parties will often obey as a

Keller, Wendler: Is there a Common Approach to Provisional Measures? -

An Overview of ICSID Case Law(SchiedsVZ 2011, 183) 194
Tribunal might consider a party's default to comply with provisional measures when issuing the final
awardis2. Lastly, ICSID Tribunals may at least avail themselves of the practical scope to impose

sanctions against a party failing to comply with the recommendation153.
IV. Conclusion

To summarize, a party will have to show a level of necessity and urgency, a right protected under
the applicable provisions at issue, and prima facie jurisdiction of the Tribunal to succeed with an
application for provisional measures under ICSID case law. Although a common approach to
provisional measures under ICSID case law seems to be in the making, Tribunals still disagree
about the specific circumstances requiring provisional measures. While the test of irreparable harm
to prove the necessity of a provisional measure might have lost some support by Tribunals, recent
case law shows that the question of the prevailing standard is far from being resolved. It remains
to be seen which approach will be adopted by investment arbitration Tribunals in the future.
Several other issues, such as the circumstances in which the duty not to aggravate the dispute
becomes relevant, or whether or not the protection of the right to specific performance of a
contract - terminated or still in force - can be sought by means of a recommendation for
provisional measures, also continue to be unsettled and will be the topic of further debates. Any
future development sharpening the general requirements, ideally with a large consensus, will be
beneficial for the involved parties and thus strengthen the reliability and importance of investment

arbitration as dispute resolution mechanism.

* Dr. Moritz Keller, LL.M. (Wisconsin) is an associate with Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
(Frankfurt), Carsten Wendler Lopez, LL.M. (NYU) is a PhD candidate at the International
Investment Law Centre Cologne (IILCC) at the University of Cologne and currently Visiting Scholar
at UC Berkeley, Boalt Hall. The authors would like to thank Noiana Marigo for her valuable
comments and insights. The views expressed in this article, and any errors, remain the authors’
own.

1 International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes, Washington D.C.

2 City Oriente Ltd v. Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on revocation of provisional
measures of 13 May 2008; Perenco Ecuador Ltd v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal
Petrdleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Provisional Measures,
8 May 2009; Burlington Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal
Petrdleos del Ecuador (PetroEcuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Procedural Order No. 1 on
Burlington Oriente's Request for Provisional Measures, 29 June 2009. Burlington was represented
by Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP.

3 United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) Arbitration Rules, adopted 28
April 1976, General Assembly Resolution 31/98.

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
13 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

4 See Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Company and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Company v. The
Government of Mongolia, UNCITRAL Case, Order on Interim Measures, 2 September 2008, paras.
63-78.

5 See CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. and CEMEX Caracas II Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/15, Decision on the Claimants’ Request for
Provisional Measures, 3 March 2010.

6 “Article 47Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the
circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which should be taken to preserve
the respective rights of either party.”

7 Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States.

8 “Rule 39Provisional Measures(1) At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party may
request that provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be recommended by the
Tribunal. The request shall specify the rights to be preserved, the measures the recommendation of
which is requested, and the circumstances that require such measures.(2) The Tribunal shall give
priority to the consideration of a request made pursuant to paragraph (1).(3) The Tribunal may also
recommend provisional measures on its own initiative or recommend measures other than those
specified in a request. It may at any time modify or revoke its recommendations.(4) The Tribunal
shall only recommend provisional measures, or modify or revoke its recommendations, after giving
each party an opportunity of presenting its observations.(5) If a party makes a request pursuant to
paragraph (1) before the constitution of the Tribunal, the Secretary-General shall, on the
application of either party, fix time limits for the parties to present observations on the request, so
that the request and observations may be considered by the Tribunal promptly upon its
constitution.(6) Nothing in this Rule shall prevent the parties, provided that they have so stipulated
in the agreement recording their consent, from requesting any judicial or other authority to order
provisional measures, prior to or after the institution of the proceeding, for the preservation of their
respective rights and interests.”

9 ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings.

10 See e.g. Military Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of
America), Provisional Measures, Order of May 10, 1984, I.C.J. Reports 1984, p. 169, para. 24.

11 Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v.
Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on provisional measures of 17 August 2007, para.
55; SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/13; City Oriente Ltd v. Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on provisional
measures of 19 November 2007, para. 50; Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v.
Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on the Request for Provisional Measures of
25 September 2001, para. 6 et seq. See also Charles M. Brower/Ronald E.M. Goodman, Provisional
Measures and the Protection of ICSID Jurisdictional Exclusivity Against Municipal Proceedings,
ICSID Review - Foreign Investment Law Journal (1991), p. 431, 452 et seq.; Arshed Massod,
Provisional Measures of Protection under the World Bank Convention, Delhi Law Review, p. 138,
144-145 relying on the screening done by the center under Article 36 of the Convention. Note that
the Tribunal in Tokios Tokelés did not mention the requirement of prima facie jurisdiction, but
emphasized that the determination on the provisional measure did not prejudge jurisdiction, see
Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/18, Procedural Order No. 1 of 1 July 2003.

12 See Pey Casado (see above at 11), para. 8. See also Christoph Schreuer et al., The ICSID
Convention: A Commentary, 2nd Edition, 2009, Article 47, para. 48, “/The registration of a request
for arbitration under Art. 36(3)] provides a useful basis for [the tribunal's] power to recommend
provisional measures".

13 See for example Perenco (see above at 2), para. 39, where the Tribunal stated that “/i/t is not
enough” that the Secretary-General has registered the Request for Arbitration under Article 36 (3)
of the ICSID Convention.

14 See Burlington (see above at 2), para. 50; also, see Occidental (see above at 11), para. 55.

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
14 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

15 See Perenco (see above at 2), paras. 39 - 40.

16 Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kaplun v. Plurinational State of Bolivia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures, 26 February 2010, para. 109. Note
that on 2 May 2007, Bolivia withdrew from the ICSID Convention. In accordance with Art. 71 of the
ICSID Convention, the denunciation took effect six months after.

17 See Charles N. Brower/Ronald E.M. Goodman, Provisional Measures and the Protection of ICSID
Jurisdictional Exclusivity Against Municipal Proceedings, ICSID Review - Foreign Investment Law
Journal (1991), p. 431, 444. See also Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention A
Commentary, 2nd Edition, 2009, Article 47, para. 63; Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka AS v.
Slovakia, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Procedural Order No. 3 of 5 November 1998, rejecting the
Claimant's submission that there must be “compelling circumstances” or circumstances of “absolute
necessity” in order to grant provisional measures.

18 Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Procedural Order No. 2
of 28 October 1999, para. 10. This notion has been cited by many subsequent tribunals, e.g. Plama
Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICISD Case No. ARB/03/24, Order, 6 September 2005,
para. 38; Phoenix Action Ltd. v. Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O6/5, Order, 6 April 2007,
para. 33; Occidental (see above at 11); CEMEX (see above at 5). See also Sergei Paushok (see
above at 4), stating that “/i/t is not contested that interim measures are extraordinary measures
not to be granted lightly, as stated in a number of arbitral awards rendered under various
arbitration rules”.

19 In addition to the decisions cited above see Plama (see above at 18), para. 39; Phoenix (see
above at 18), para. 33; Saipem v. Bangladesh, Decision on Jurisdiction, 21 March 2007, paras.
174, 182, 185; Occidental (see above at 11), para. 59; City Oriente (see above at 11), para. 54;
Perenco (see above at 2), para. 43; Burlington (see above at 2), para. 51; CEMEX (see above at
5), para. 41; Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No. 3 of 18
January 2005, para. 8. It is noteworthy that in the drafting sessions of the ICSID Convention the
reference to urgency and imminent danger was rejected, see Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The
ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd Edition, 2009, Article 47, para. 63.

20 See also Francisco Orrego Vicufia, The Evolving Nature of Provisional Measures, in: Fernandez-
Ballesteros, M.A./Arias, D. (eds.), Liber Amicorum Bernardo Cremades, 2010, p. 952, “the scope of
rights to be protected, urgency and harm are still much debated”.

21 See for example, Occidental (see above at 11), paras. 88 - 91, where the Tribunal comes to the
conclusion that the Claimants have failed to “make out their case of urgent necessity”. However,
the Tribunal refrained from providing distinct definitions for urgency and necessity. It seems that
urgent necessity means “imminent danger of harm”. See also Perenco (see above at 2), para. 43,
“provisional measures may only be granted where they are urgent, because they cannot be
necessary if, for the time being, there is no demonstrable need for them”.

22 Passage through the Great Belt (Finland v. Denmark), Provisional Measures, Order of 29 July
1991, ICJ Reports 1991, 17; this passage was quoted by Tokios Tokelés (see above at 19), para. 8.
See also Certain Criminal Proceedings in France (Republic of the Congo v. France), Provisional
Measures, Order of 17 June 2003, ICJ Reports 2003, 107; Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay
(Argentina v. Uruguay), Preliminary Objections, Order of 23 January 2007, 11.

23 See Christoph H. Schreuer et al., ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd Edition, 2009, Article
47 para. 63 (“it is clear that provisional measures will only be appropriate where a question cannot
await the outcome of the award”), note that this quote was referred to in Biwater Gauff v.
Tanzania, Procedural Order No. 1, 31 March 2006, para. 68 (the Tribunal quoted the First
Edition).For ICSID jurisprudence see e.g. Azurix Corp v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12,
Decision on Provisional Measures, 6 August 2003, para. 33 (‘imminent possibility that the rights of
a party be prejudiced before the tribunal has rendered its award"); Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, see
above at 76 (“where a party can prove that there is a need to obtain the requested measure at a
certain point in the procedure before the issuance of an award"); Tokios Tokelés (see above at 19),
para. 8 (“where actions prejudicial to the rights of either party is likely to be taken before such final

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
15 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

decision is taken"), City Oriente (see above at 11), para. 67 (“provisional measures are only
appropriate if it is impossible to wait for specific issues to be settled at the merits stage”). See also
Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler and Aurélia Antonietti, Interim Relief in International Investment
Agreements, in: Katia Yannaca-Small (ed.), Arbitration under International Investment
Agreements, p. 507, 536.

24 See Biwater (see above at 23), para. 76.

25 See City Oriente (see above at 11).

26 See City Oriente (see above at 11), para. 69.

27 See Burlington (see above at 2), para. 74, with reference to City Oriente (see above at 2).
28 See Quiborax (see above at 16), para. 153.

29 See CEMEX (see above at 5), para. 42. See also Burlington (see above at 2), para. 51 (“an
assessment of the risk of harm to be avoided by the measures"). For the same wording see
Quiborax (see above at 16), para. 113.

30 See Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd Edition, 2009,
Article 47, para. 64, stating “ICSID Arbitration Practice shows that Tribunals will only grant
provisional measures if they are found to be necessary, urgent and required in order to avoid
irreparable harm".

31 See Tokios Tokelés (see above at 19).

32 See Tokios Tokelés (see above at 19), para. 8, emphasis added. See also Phoenix (see above at
18), para. 33: “the action of a party capable of causing or of threatening to cause irreparable
prejudice to the rights involved".

33 In addition, the Tribunal did not even see the claimant's rights relating to the dispute before the
Tribunal affected by the measures taken by Ukraine. It should be noted that the Tribunal — with
then a different President - did issue a recommendation for provisional measures on 1 July 2003.
See Tokios Tokelés (see above at 11).

34 See Plama (see above at 18).
35 See Plama (see above at 18), para. 38, emphasis added.

36 See Occidental (see above at 11), para. 59 (“the circumstances under which provisional
measures are required under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention are those in which the measures
are necessary to preserve a party's right and when the need is urgent in order to avoid irreparable
harm”); see also para. 61 (“in order for an international tribunal to grant provisional measures,
there must exist both a right to be preserved and circumstances of necessity and urgency to avoid
irreparable harm”, emphasis in original) and para. 87 (“An order for provisional measures will only
be made where such measures are found to be necessary and urgent in order to avoid imminent
and irreparable harm.” Emphasis added).

37 See Occidental (see above at 11), para. 89. “Provisional measures are not meant to protect
against any potential or hypothetical harm susceptible to result from uncertain actions. Rather they
are meant to protect the requesting party from imminent harm.”

38 See CEMEX (see above at 5), para. 44.

39 The Tribunal refers in detail to Plama (see above at 18), Phoenix (see above at 18), Occidental
(see above at 11), Burlington (see above at 2), and Perenco (see above at 2).

40 See CEMEX (see above at 5), para. 56.

41 Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Decision on a
request by the respondent for an order prohibiting the claimant from revealing information
regarding ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, 27 October 1997.

42 See Metalclad (see above at 41), para. 8.

43 See Metalclad (see above at 41), para. 8.

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
16 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

44 See Plama (see above at 18), para. 46, “The Tribunal accepts Respondent's argument that harm
is not irreparable if it can be compensated for by damages, which is the case in the present
arbitration and which, moreover, is the only remedy Claimant seeks.”

45 See Occidental (see above at 11), paras. 59 et seq., in particular para. 97, “/p/rovisional
measures are not designed to merely mitigate the final amount of damages".

46 See Occidental (see above at 11), paras. 92 and 99. See also the concurring opinion in City
Oriente (see above at 2), para. 60 et seq. establishing that in case of claims for the performance of
a contract other remedies than damages would be available and, thus, provisional measures are
then possible.

47 See CEMEX (see above at 5), para. 58.

48 See CEMEX (see above at 5), para. 57.

49 See CEMEX (see above at 5), para. 58.

50 Quiborax (see above at 15), para. 157.

51 CEMEX (see above at 4), paras. 55 — 56.

52 See City Oriente (see above at 2), paras. 67 et seq.

53 See City Oriente (see above at 2), para. 70. The Tribunal referred to the urgency analysis by the
Tribunal in the Decision dated 19 November 2007 (see above at 11), paras. 67 et seq.

54 See City Oriente (see above at 2), para. 72.

55 See City Oriente (see above at 2), para. 72. The Tribunal in Saipem (see above at 19), para. 175
employed a similar wording.

56 City Oriente, (see above at 2), paras. 76-78.
57 See Perenco (see above at 2), para. 43.
58 Perenco (see above at 2), para. 46.

59 See Perenco (see above at 2), para. 48. The Tribunal quoted the Occidental Tribunal (see above
at 11): “It is well established that where a State has, in the exercise of its sovereign powers, put an
end to a contract or license, or any other foreign investor's entitlement, specific performance must
be deemed legally impossible", para. 79.

60 See Perenco (see above at 2), para. 53.

61 See Burlington (see above at 2), para. 82. Emphasis added.
62 See Burlington (see above at 2), para. 78.

63 See Burlington (see above at 2), para. 82.

64 See Burlington (see above at 2), para. 83.

65 See Burlington (see above at 2), para. 85.

66 See Burlington (see above at 2), para. 87.

67 Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/0O7/23,
Decision on Provisional Measures, 15 October 2008.

68 See Railroad (see above at 67), para. 34.

69 See Railroad (see above at 68), para. 34.

70 See Railroad (see above at 68), para. 36.

71 Sergei Paushok ( see above at 4).

72 See Sergei Paushok ( see above at 4), para. 69.

73 See Sergei Paushok (see above at 4), para. 36. It is noteworthy that the Tribunal states that it is
internationally recognized that there are 5 requirements for interim measures, i.e. (1) prima facie
jurisdiction, (2) prima facie establishment of the case, (3) urgency, (4) necessity and (5)
proportionality.

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
17 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

74 See Sergei Paushok (see above at 4), para. 65, 68. Note again that the Tribunal refers to
“interim measures” under the UNCITRAL Rules.

75 See Sergei Paushok, (see above at 4), para. 68. In addition, the Tribunal quotes K.P. Berger who
requires only “'substantial’ (but not necessarily ‘irreparable’ as known in common law doctrine)
prejudice”, Berger, K.P., International Economic Arbitration, 1993, 336.

Mw

76 The relevant part of Article 17A of the UNCITRAL MODEL LAW reads as follows:“Article 17A.
Conditions for granting interim measures(1) The party requesting an interim measure under article
17(2)(a), (b) and (c) shall satisfy the arbitral tribunal that:(a) Harm not adequately reparable by
an award of damages is likely to result if the measure is not ordered, and such harm substantially
outweighs the harm that is likely to result to the party against whom the measure is directed if the
measure is granted; [...].”

77 See Sergei Paushok (see above at 4), para. 77.
78 See Sergei Paushok (see above at 4), para. 78.

79 See for example City Oriente (see above at 2), para. 72 (“weighing the harm spared the
petitioner and the damage inflicted in the other party”). The Tribunal in Saipem (see above at 19),
para. 175 employed a similar wording. See also Burlington (see above at 2), para. 82 (“/The
Tribunal] will also weigh the interests of both sides in assessing necessity."). See also Railroad (see
above at 68), para. 34, applying the standard of reasonableness.

80 See e.g. Quiborax (see above at 16), para. 158. See also Sergei Paushok (see above at 4), para.
79 et seq.

81 Quiborax (see above at 15), para. 155.
82 Quiborax (see above at 15), para. 156.

83 Quiborax (see above at 15), para. 156. Since the Tribunal found the standard to be met, it did
not have to solve the dispute about the applicable standard.

84 See also CEMEX (see above at 4), paras. 55-56. The CEMEX Tribunal finds that even though
Tribunals have relied on other criteria than irreparable harm, in fact they based their decision on
the fact that “the destruction of the ongoing concern that constituted the investment, would have
created an irreparable harm.”

85 See Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd Edition, 2009,
Article 47, para. 73.

86 Amco Asia Corporation and Others v. the Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/01,
Decision on Request for Provisional Measures of 9 December 1983, 1 ICSID Rep., p. 410-411.

87 See Amco (see above at 86).
88 See Maffezini (see above at 18).
89 See Maffezini (see above at 18), para. 23.

90 Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler and Aurélia Antonietti, “Interim Relief in International Investment
Agreements”, 515, in: Arbitration under International Investment Agreements — A guide to the key
issues, Yannaca-Small, K. (ed.), Oxford University Press 2010. However, it is interesting to note
that in Occidental the rights to be protected were precisely the subject-matter of the arbitration,
see Occidental (see above at 11), para. 63.

91 See Plama (see above at 18), para. 40. The Tribunal concluded that the Plama's claims and
requests for relief were limited to damages under the Energy Charta Treaty. Thus, the Tribunal
found the local proceedings of no threat to the ICSID arbitration, since Plama's claim for damages
before the ICSID Tribunal would not be affected. See also Saipem (see above at 19), para. 179;
Quiborax (see above at 16), paras. 117 et seq.; Burlington (see above at 2), para. 60: “In the
Tribunal's view, the rights to be preserved by provisional measures are not limited to those which
form the subject-matter of the dispute or substantive rights as referred to by the Respondents, but
may extend to procedural rights, including the general right to the status quo and to the non-
aggravation of the dispute. These /atter rights are thus self-standing rights.”

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
18 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

92 See Biwater (see above at 23); Vacuum Salt Products Limited v. Government of the Republic of
Ghana, ICSID Case No. ARB/92/1; Agip Spa v. the Government of the People's Republic of the
Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/77/1, 1 ICSID Rep., p. 306, 310-311; Railroad (see above at 68);
Quiborax (see above at 16).

93 See Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22,
Procedural Order No. 3 of 29 September 2006; Amco (see above at 86).

94 See Biwater (see above at 93); see Amco (see above at 86); Quiborax (see above at 16);
CEMEX (see above at 5).

95 See cases discussed below.

96 See Maffezini (see above at 18); Pey Casado (see above at 11), both denying the requests for
different reasons.

97 See Occidental (see above at 11).

98 See City Oriente (see above at 11); Burlington (see above at 2); Perenco (see above at 2).
99 See Saipem (see above at 19), para. 179 et seq.

100 See Quiborax (see above at 16).

101 See CEMEX (see above at 5).

102 See Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgaria (Belgium v. Bulgaria), Judgment of 5 December
1939, PCIJ series A/B, No 79, p. 199. See also the LaGrand case (Germany v. United States),
Judgment of 27 June 2001, para. 103, ICJ Reports 2001, p.466. ICSID Tribunals have frequently
relied upon these cases, see e.g. Pey Casado (see above at 11), para. 67 et seq.; Burlington (see
above at 2), para. 62; Quiborax (see above at 16), para. 134.

103 Some Tribunals apply a necessity-requirement while others seem to rather decide on the basis
of a general consideration of the case. See also Paul D. Friedland, Provisional measures and ICSID
arbitration, Arb. Int. (1986), p. 335, 338 discussing which conduct might be taken into
consideration.

104 The decision in Holiday Inns v. Morocco has not been published. This essay relies on the report
made by Lalive in Pierre Lalive, The First ‘World Bank’ Arbitration (Holiday Inns v. Morocco) - Some
Legal Problems, 51 British Year Book of International Law, reprinted in 1 ICSID Reports, p. 645 et
seq.

105 See Amco (see above at 86).
106 See Amco (see above at 86).

107 See Pey Casado (see above at 11), para. 73 et seq. In Tokios Tokelés (see above at 11), para.
7 the Tribunal considered the risk of parallel administrative or judicial proceedings calling for
provisional measures not to aggravate the dispute.

108 See Pey Casado (see above at 11), para. 77.

109 See Plama (see above at 18), para. 45. The considerations in City Oriente (see above at 2),
para. 62 et seq. are inconclusive.

110 See Plama (see above at 18), para. 46. As mentioned supra the Plama Tribunal found harm that
could be compensated by an award of monetary damages is not sufficient ground for granting
provisional measures.

111 See Burlington (see above at 2), paras. 61-68; Quiborax (see above at 16), paras. 135 et seq.
112 See Burlington (see above at 2), para. 65.

113 Art. 26 of the ICSID Convention reads:“Article 26Consent of the parties to arbitration under this
Convention shall, unless otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion
of any other remedy. A Contracting State may require the exhaustion of local administrative or
judicial remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration under this Convention.”For an early
debate on whether provisional measures can be granted in parallel proceedings see Bertrand P.
Marchais, ICSID Tribunals and Provisional Measures — Introductory Note to Decisions of the
Tribunals of Antwerp and Geneva in MINE v. Guinea, ICSID Review - Foreign Investment Law

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
19 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

Journal 1992, p. 372 et seq.; Paul D. Friedland, ICSID and Court-Ordered Provisional Remedies: An
Update, Arb. Int. (1988), p. 161 et seq.; Antonio R. Parra, The Practice and Experience of the
ICSID, p. 37, 37-38 in: Conservatory and Provisional Measures in International Arbitration, 1993
(also providing an overview on cases with parallel proceedings involved).

114 See Holiday Inns v. Monaco (see above at 104). Morocco gained authorization from the state
courts to complete the construction of two Holiday Inns hotels and, at the same time, had a judicial
administrator appointed for another two Holiday Inns already operating in Morocco.

115 See Pierre Lalive, The First ‘World Bank’ Arbitration (Holiday Inns v. Morocco) - Some Legal
Problems, 51 British Year Book of International Law, reprinted in 1 ICSID Reports, p. 645, 658.

116 See SGS Société Générale (see above at 11).

117 See SGS Société Générale (see above at 11), Procedural Order No. 2 of 16 October 2002: “Y...]
the Tribunal recommends that the Government of Pakistan not take any step to initiate a complaint
for contempt. It recommends further that, in the event that any other party, including the Supreme
Court of Pakistan take all necessary steps to inform the Court of the current standing of this
proceeding and of the fact that this Tribunal must discharge its duty to determine whether it has
the jurisdiction to consider the international claim on the merits. The Government of Pakistan
should ensure that if contempt proceedings are initiated by any party, such proceedings not be
acted upon. [...] the Tribunal recommends that the Islamabad-based arbitration pending between
the Government of Pakistan and SGS be stayed until such time, if any, as this Tribunal has issued
an award declining jurisdiction over the present dispute, and that award is no longer capable of
being interpreted, revised or annulled pursuant to the ICSID Convention.”A recommendation with a
similar wording can also be found in the case of Vacuum Salt Products (see above at 92). However,
as the recommendation embodied a voluntary undertaking by Ghana, it is not technically a
recommendation for provisional measures. See Vacuum Salt Products Limited (see above at 92),
para. 16 containing a summary of the events surrounding the provisional measures. See also the
case of Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. (Turkey) v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29, Award of 14 November 2005 in which a recommendation that Pakistan
shall make sure that any judgment by Turkish courts obtained by a public Pakistani corporation will
not be enforced.

118 See Tokios Tokelés (see above at 11). It is noteworthy that the Tribunal also held that the
jurisdictional requirements of Article 25 ICSID Convention must not be established for provisional
measures.

119 See Tokios Tokelés (see above at 19), para. 11.

120 See Tokios Tokelés (see above at 19), paras. 12-18. The arrest of assets and the tax
investigations had ended before the request for provisional measures was filed, and the criminal
proceedings against O.V. Danylov, the key manager of Taki Spravy (the Claimant's subsidiary in
Ukraine), were found not to jeopardize the rendering of the ultimate ICSID award.

121 Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka AS v. Slovakia, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Procedural Order
No. 4 of 11 January 1999.

122 See Ceskoslovenska (see above at 121). Another similar recommendation was issued in
Procedural Order No. 5 of 1 March 2000.

123 See Plama (see above at 18), para. 43.

124 See Pey Casado (see above at 11), para. 40.

125 See Quiborax (see above at 16), paras. 128-131.
126 See Quiborax (see above at 16), paras. 129-130.

127 The same reasoning has already been argued by Charles N. Brower/Ronald E.M. Goodman,
Provisional Measures and the Protection of ICSID Jurisdictional Exclusivity Against Municipal
Proceedings, ICSID Review - Foreign Investment Law Journal (1991), p. 431, 444. As mentioned
supra nowadays it is established ICSID case law that provisional measures must always be urgent
and necessary. This was clarified particularly for the right to exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings in
Ceskoslovenska (see above at 17), “provisional measures [...] require [...] a showing that they are

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
20 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

necessary to preserve the rights of the parties and, further, that the rights to be thus preserved
include, in principle, the right to the exclusive remedy provided for in Article 26 of the Convention”,
emphasis added. See also CEMEX (see above at 5), para. 69, establishing “that the continuation of
the proceedings in the Venezuelan Administrative Court meets the requirements necessary for
recommending such measures”, emphasis added.

128 See e.g., Holiday Inns v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/72/1, Order of 2 July 1972;
Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) (Liechtenstein) v. The Republic of Guinea,
ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, 3 International Arbitration Report 1988, p. A2-44; SGS Société Générale
(see above at 11), Procedural Order No. 2 of 16 October 2002 (Request for Relief No. 3).

129 Tanzania Electric Supply Company Ltd. (TANESCO) v. Independent Power Tanzania Ltd. (IPTL),
ICSID Case No. ARB/98/8, Appendix A, Decision on the Respondent's Request for Provisional
Measures of 22 June 2001, para. 12.

130 See Occidental (see above at 11), paras. 12 et seq.; Maffezini (see above at 18), para. 14.

131 See Tanzania (see above at 129), paras. 13 et seq. The Tribunal in Tanzania nevertheless
underlined that recommendations under Rule 39 might theoretically involve the performance of a
contract. It argued that as long as a recommendation would effectively preserve a party's right to
enjoy the benefits of an agreement such recommendation would fall out of the scope of Rule 39.

132 See Occidental (see above at 11), para. 79, “It is well established that where a State has, in the
exercise of its sovereign powers, put an end to a contract or a license, or any other foreign
investor's entitlement, specific performance must be deemed legally impossible.”

133 See Occidental (see above at 11), para. 84.

134 See City Oriente (see above at 11), paras. 10 et seq., ‘/...] that Respondents refrain from
prosecuting the enforced collection of any present or future amounts disputed in this arbitration,
and that they refrain from initiating a proceeding for the administrative declaration of termination
of the concession on account of non-payment of said moneys pending the arbitral award.”

135 See City Oriente (see above at 2), paras. 43 et seq.
136 See City Oriente (see above at 2), paras. 88 et seq.

137 It has to be kept in mind, in addition, that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in the City Oriente
case was based on a contract in comparison to the jurisdiction being based on a Treaty or a law in
other cases.

138 See City Oriente (see above at 2), paras. 42 et seq. Considering the timing issue in Occidental
and City Oriente, one might even see the controversy only as a question of at what time the status
quo to be protected has to be established. See also Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID
Convention: A Commentary, 2nd Edition, 2009, Article 47, para. 73.

139 See Burlington (see above at 2) , para. 70.

140 See Burlington (see above at 2), para. 70. It is noteworthy that the Tribunal in the similar case
of Perenco (see above at 2) came to the same conclusion and distinguished its case from
Occidental (see above at 11) by stressing that the Participation Contract had not been terminated
or cancelled. However, in Perenco (see above at 2) the Tribunal refrained from using the term
“specific performance of contracts” in its analysis.

141 See Burlington (see above at 2), para. 71.

142 See the discussion of the drafting history in Charles M. Brower/Ronald E.M. Goodman,
Provisional Measures and the Protection of ICSID Jurisdictional Exclusivity Against Municipal
Proceedings, ICSID Review - Foreign Investment Law Journal (1991), p. 431, 440 et seq. See also
Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd Edition, 2009, Article 47,
paras. 15-17.

143 Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd Edition, 2009, Article
47, para. 16.

144 See Maffezini (see above at 18), para. 9.

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
21 von 22 16.10.2020
Kopie von Freshfields , abgerufen am 16.10.2020 05:13 - Quelle: beck-online DIE DATENBANK

145 See Tokios Tokelés (see above at 11); City Oriente (see above at 11), para. 52; Pey Casado
(see above at 11), para. 21.

146 Article 41 of the ICJ Statute reads:“Article 411. The Court shall have the power to indicate, if it
considers that circumstances so require, any provisional measures which ought to be taken to
preserve the respective rights of either party.2. Pending the final decision, notice of the measures
suggested shall forthwith be given to the parties and to the Security Council.”

147 See LaGrand Case (see above at 102), para. 102.

148 See Occidental (see above at 11), paras. 58 et seq.: Tokios Tokelés (see above at 11), para. 4;
City Oriente (see above at 2), para. 52; Perenco (see above at 2), para. 76, holding that the term
‘request’ is legally binding. See on the other hand Julian D.M. Lew, ICSID Arbitration: Special
Features and Recent Developments. in: Horn, N./Kroell, S. (eds.): Arbitrating Foreign Investment
Disputes. Procedural and Substantive Legal Aspects, p. 267, 271; Lawrence Collins, Provisional and
Protective Measures in International Litigation, III, 1992, p. 99; Torsten Loercher, ICSID-
Schiedsgerichtsbarkeit, SchiedsVZ 2005, p. 11, 16; Arshed Massod, Provisional Measures of
Protection under the World Bank Convention, Delhi Law Review, p. 138, 145-146 (“moral
authority”); See Antonio R. Parra, The Practice and Experience of the ICSID, p. 37, 41 in:
Conservatory and Provisional Measures in International Arbitration, 1993 for the opposing view.
See also Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd Edition, 2009,
Article 47, paras. 15-22, who argues that the ICSID Convention's legislative history suggests that
provisional measures have no binding character, however, he points to the doctrine developed by
ICSID Tribunals under which provisional measures are binding. See also Zannis Mavrogordato and
Gabriel Sidere, “The Nature and Enforceability of ICSID Provisional Measures”, 75 Arbitration 38,
(2009), 41-42; most recently also Francisco Orrego Vicuha, “The Evolving Nature of Provisional
Measures”, in: Fernandez-Ballesteros, M.A./Arias, D. (eds.) Liber Amicorum Bernardo Cremades,
2010, p. 954, for a binding nature of provisional measures.

149 Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd Edition, 2009, Article
47, para. 4; Reed/Paulsson/Blackaby, Guide to ICSID Arbitration, 2004, p. 86.

150 See also Zannis Mavrogordato and Gabriel Sidere, “The Nature and Enforceability of ICSID
Provisional Measures”, 75 Arbitration 38, (2009), pp. 44-46.

151 In AGIP v. Congo, Congo failed to comply with the recommendation. See Georges R. Delaume,
ICSID Tribunals and Provisional Measures - A Review of the Cases, ICSID Review - Foreign
Investment Law Journal 1992, p. 392, 393. Nevertheless, the Congo proceedings took place before
the case law established that recommendations are, in fact, binding on the parties.

152 See Steven P. Finizio, Ethan G. Shenkman and Julian Davis Mortenson, Recent developments in
investor-state arbitration: effective use of provisional measures, The European Arbitration Review
2007, p. 15, 16; Arshed Massod, Provisional Measures of Protection under the World Bank
Convention, Delhi Law Review, p. 138, 146; See also Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID
Convention: A Commentary, 2nd Edition, 2009, Article 47, para. 16.

153 See Robert Volterra, “Provisional Measures (Interim Measures) and Investment Treaty
Arbitration under ICSID and UNCITRAL: Developments and Trends”, in: Bjorklund, A./Laird,
I//Ripinsky, S. (eds.): Investment Treaty Law: Current Issues III, 2009, p. 22.

https: //beck-online.beck.de/Bcid/Y-300-Z-SCHIEDSVZ-B-2011-S-183-N-1
22 von 22 16.10.2020
