Chapter 13

Panel 3: Interim Relief in Investment
Treaty Arbitration

Featured Speakers: lan A. Laird
(Munir) A.F.M. Maniruzzaman
Don Wallace, Jr.
David Branson
Claudia Frutos-Peterson

[Begin Panel 3.]

MR. SABAHI: Our third panel deals with interim measures and
investment treaty arbitration.

The moderator needs no introduction, he is Ian Laird. Ian is Co-
Chair of Crowell & Moring's International Dispute Resolution Group, and
he's well-known in international investment treaty arbitration circles. He's
cofounder and Editor-in-Chief of the InvestmentClaims.com Website,
which I am sure anyone who does investment arbitration uses. And he is
Co-Editor of the book series, “Investment Treaty Arbitration and
International Law,” with Volume 7 now published by Juris Publishing
which is based on the annual Juris Conference on Investment Treaty
Arbitration held here in Washington, D.C.

Ian is currently serving as an adjunct professor of law at Georgetown
University Law Center.

Ian has extensive experience acting as counsel in investment treaty
arbitration cases under NAFTA, DR-CAFTA, and under a number of BITs,
most recently has been involved in cases involving El Salvador, Lithuania,
Kazakhstan, Mongolia, and Turkey.

And prior to coming to D.C., he was Chief of Staff to a Canadian
Cabinet Minister and Senior Political Aide to Ontario's Minister of Energy
as well as having run political campaigns.

And thank you, Ian, it's all yours.

Ian Laird, Moderator
Executive Summary:

The Pope & Talbot v. Canada NAFTA Chapter 11 arbitration
demonstrated a particular answer to the issue of how an arbitral tribunal
should handle a sovereign who is using its right to regulate the opposite
party in the arbitral proceedings in a harassing, punitive and “made-for-
arbitration” manner. In that case, the Claimant made a motion for interim

235

236 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

measure to direct Canada to cease and desist from pursuing an audit of the
Claimant in which the Government of Canada was threatening to
eliminate the Claimant's softwood lumber quota all together. While the
Pope & Talbot tribunal declined to issue the interim measure to preserve the
status quo, it made a number of strong observations regarding Canada's
conduct, including that it found Canada's measure extreme and unusual
and the audit to be seriously flawed and an unreliable basis for further
action. In essence, the Tribunal made a diplomatic gesture concerning the
facts with the result that Canada did not in fact act on the audit, did not
eliminate the Claimant's quota and did not exacerbate the dispute.

MR. LAIRD: Well, thank you very much, Borzu, and welcome back
everyone.

This panel has a particular resonance for me because I was involved
in an interim measures motion when I was a young lawyer and working
on one of my first international arbitrations - a NAFTA arbitration under
the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules. So, as many of you will recall in some of the
slides that Benno put up earlier, Article 26 of the 1976 UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules was pretty rudimentary in the sense that it allowed for
an order of the tribunal for an interim measure, but really did not have the
kind of detail that we've seen now included in the latest 2010 arbitration
rules to define what that means.

So, it was in one of my first NAFTA cases that we made an interim
measures motion that went right to the heart of the case. It was a case called
Pope & Talbot v. Canada, and this was a softwood lumber case. There were
many disputes over softwood lumber, not only through the state-to-state
dispute chapters of the NAFTA, the cases went to the WTO and there were a
number of investor-state arbitration cases under NAFTA Chapter 11. And
in this case--this was one of the first years I was practicing arbitration as a
young associate, we filed the arbitration and within about a month or two,
Canada demanded an audit of our client. Audits happen frequently enough
when one of these very complex quota regimes occur, so the client took it in
stride, but the audit become much more intrusive and, being the lawyers on
the file, we pushed back a little bit for authorization and the terms of the
audit and so forth. From that point, it really got out of control in many
ways, and it became an issue that required an interim measures motion in
the eyes of the claimant. Because the motion related to an audit, it became
clear that the Government of Canada was not only going to interfere with
the quota of Pope & Talbot, which was part of the issue of the main case, but
it was considering and threatening to eliminate their quota through the
mechanism of this audit. And so, we made some fairly serious allegations
that this was a “made-for-arbitration” form of harassment, and we made an
interim measures motion saying, basically, to Canada, to cease and desist
with this audit and that the tribunal cannot act on this audit whatever the

INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 237

result is. Basically, the claimant was seeking a maintenance of the status quo
during the arbitration.

But as we know, this is NAFTA, this is investor-state arbitration, and
it's a little different from commercial arbitration and I think we're going to
address some of these issues with our panel today. It's a little different
because of that sovereign element. It begs the question--how does a
tribunal deal with a sovereign who is, by all intents and purposes, using its
rights to audit, using its rights to regulate the opposite party, during the
arbitration process?

Well, the end result was, and I'll write about this in more detail in the
paper that accompanies the book, that the tribunal declined the requested
interim measure application. However, the Pope tribunal's approach was
quite different than the Chevron tribunal's approach, which Dr.
Maniruzzaman will talk about. In the case of the Pope tribunal, it was
under the UNCITRAL rules, as well, but the tribunal declined to order
Canada to stand down. It did however make a number of very strong
comments saying that it found the measures of Canada extreme and
unusual. In particular, I quote, “the Tribunal feels compelled to state that
the verification review and the report thereon were seriously flawed and
are not a reliable basis for further action.” The tribunal then went on to
say that if anything arose out of the measures that were at issue in the
motion, that it would reconsider and look at the issue again.

So, the result was not, in a sense, the tribunal telling Canada what to
do, but much more a diplomatic kind of statement as to the facts, and the
result was that Canada in fact did institute a de facto status quo. They did
not act on their audit; they did not eliminate the quota; they did not
exacerbate the case with any further actions.

And in fact, all of the facts that I've been describing to you around the
Pope interim measures motion became a main issue in the final award
against Canada, because a number of letters came out in the course of the
final hearing that supported the fact that the audit was intended to be
punitive (and parenthetically this goes to the question, more generally, as
to whether hearings are valuable? In civil law systems, you might say that
you could just do it all on paper. We common lawyers like to have a
hearing, we like to cross-examine people). The back story is this--the head
of the softwood lumber division, who was in charge of the audit and the
whole process at issue in the arbitration, admitted that there were a couple
of memos and letters he had written in exactly this audit period to the
Minister about these issues. Claimant had actually requested those
documents earlier and for whatever reason they had not been produced
(although counsel admitted they had been reviewed). These papers were
basically what one could call “smoking guns” because, during that time,
the Director had been recommending this complete elimination of the
quota and basically making allegations of criminal conduct and other
issues to the Minister.
238 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

In any event, I wanted to tell that little story because it really helps to
show a different approach and how far we have developed in the past 15
years. Also, since we've been talking about new puppy dogs, I certainly
was a very new puppy at that time of the Pope case.

We have a very experienced panel here today, and we will now dive
into some of the more picayune and detailed issues related to interim
measures in investment arbitration.

First, we are going to start with somebody who is very experienced in
this field, Professor Maniruzzaman, from the University of Portsmouth
Law School, and he is going to continue on with some of the issues that
I've highlighted but in more detail with regard to the overlapping element
of state sovereignty and interim measures and their impact in the investor-
state arbitration sphere.

And I want to thank the Professor very much for coming this long
way and taking time to be with us. In the interests of time, I'm not going
to read his numerous accomplishments, but I think you'll know that he has
been very active in the field of investor-state arbitration and has not only
been teaching at Portsmouth for many years, he was at Cambridge, also,
and studied there under Professor Bowett and has had a very direct and
active role at the Dundee Center, as well.

So, it's a real privilege to have you here today, Professor, and I'll ask
you to take the microphone.

Prof. Munir Maniruzzaman, Interim Measures of Protection in
International Investment Arbitration: Challenge to State Sovereignty?

Executive Summary:

The key issues to consider concerning the relationship between state
sovereignty and interim measures are whether sovereignty poses a
challenge to the authority of arbitral tribunals in ordering interim
measures in aid of arbitration and whether the arbitral tribunal can order
interim measures that are “binding” on a state party. Sovereignty can be
examined through three perspectives: classical, teleological and objective.
The classical perspective is how the notion of sovereignty is expressed in
the text and the drafting history of the constituent documents, namely
Article 41 of the ICJ Statute, Article 47 of the ICSID Convention, Article
39(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules authorizing tribunals to issue interim
measures. The teleological notion is concerned with how the arbitration
process achieves the notion of restrictive sovereignty via arbitral and
judicial decisions. The objective perspective concerns the question of how
the question of interim measures should be looked at so as to pay due
respect to state sovereignty interests. Examining the issue of sovereignty
from a classical point of view shows that constituent documents are
premised on the idea that these documents do not provide that

INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 239

preliminary measures be binding on the states concerned, as exemplified
by the use of the word “recommended” as opposed to the “prescribed” in
Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. Similarly, Article 41 of the ICJ statute,
on which Article 47 was directly modeled, uses the word “indicate” with
respect to interim measures instead of “order”. However, the status of
interim measures against states has evolved from its original formulations
in the constituent documents as a result of their interpretation and
application in judicial and arbitral practice. A number of ICJ and ICSID
tribunals would eventually hold that provisional measures are legally
binding on the states. Yet, it is important for tribunals to take sovereignty
needs of states into account in light of the recent trend among Latin
America countries of exiting the ICSID Convention and BITs.

PROF. MANIRUZZAMAN: Thank you very much for your kind
words, Ian. I thank very cordially the leadership of the International Law
Institute here for inviting me. Of course, I belong to the IDR Group and
we are jointly organizing the conference. It's a pleasure to be here in
Washington, D.C. ona bright, sunny day. Hopefully, every time I come I'll
see bright, sunny days. Washington could be my sunshine!

Right. The topic that I will be discussing, as Ian has alluded to, is the
state's involvement in arbitration and the implication of interim measures.

But a caveat: I'll not be using PowerPoint, but whatever I'll be saying
will not be less powerful. I have prepared a paper, so I'll be looking at it
briskly and summarizing my views here and there, the main issues in the
field and, of course, there will be a lot of reasons for the debate.

But anyway, without wasting any more time, let's look at the issues
around whether interim measures in international investment arbitration
are a challenge to state sovereignty.

I'm a practical academic, basically, so I'd be trying to understand the
issues from both the academic point of view as well as from the practical
point of view. I'll be understanding “sovereignty” in different senses. I
mean, I have classified the set of activities in relation to interim measures
and the implications and the reactions of states and also private parties. I
have boxed them in different ways as you can say, I'll be looking at
sovereignty through various lenses such as the classical perspectives of
state sovereignty, the teleological perspectives of state sovereignty, and the
objective perspectives of state sovereignty.

I'll briefly explain what they are, but let's first look at the issues and
their implications.

In aid of an arbitration, tribunals often have to order interim
measures of protection against any party to the dispute concerned.

In arbitral jurisprudence, arbitration laws and rules, as well as in
juristic views, the expressions such as “provisional measures,” “interim
measures,” “conservatory measures,” “protective measures,” and

240 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

“injunctions,” are used in the same sense. In this paper, they will be used
interchangeably.

In investor-state arbitration, the status of the state party as sovereign
often raises various issues in various respects in the context of ordering
interim measures in connection with an arbitration; arbitral tribunals have
to ponder over various considerations that may affect the sovereignty of
the state party.

It is well-recognized that all parties to an arbitration are treated
equally, but the state party has some special characteristics as may be
noticed that a private party counterpart does not have. Thus, in
arbitration, the issues such as states' public interest, sovereign immunity,
public law powers, eminent domain, or international obligations et cetera
could arise with a sovereign state as a party.

This paper explores whether, in an investor-state arbitration, state
sovereignty poses a challenge to the arbitral tribunal in ordering interim
measures in aid of arbitration. It also examines whether the arbitral
tribunal can order interim measures that are binding on the state party,
and whether the sovereign status of the state party in practical terms may
influence the considerations of arbitral tribunal while deciding on the
grant of interim measures against the state party.

In examining these issues, the notion of sovereignty has been looked
at, as mentioned earlier, through various lenses or perspectives, namely
classical, teleological, and objective. This is the main focus of this talk.

Now, the principal sets of rules that we find in practice of investor
and state arbitration dealing with interim measures are ICSID
Convention's Article 47 and Rule 39 of ICSID Arbitration Rules and also
Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. I won't go into a detailed
analysis of them, but I'll just mention briefly the implications of various
wordings there on the issuance of interim measures. An investor-state
arbitral tribunal's authority to order provisional measures is usually based
on the parties' consent. However, Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and
Article 26.1 of the UNCITRAL Arbitral Rules, both in the 1976 and the 2010
version, it may be implied that the tribunals have inherent power to grant
interim measures. Article 1134 of NAFTA Chapter 11 expressly provides
that a tribunal may order an interim measure of protection. In light of the
expression, “except as the parties otherwise agree,” used in Article 47 of
the ICSID Convention, it can be said that the Parties can mutually design
their required interim measures as they deem appropriate or extend or
limit the tribunal's authority to recommend interim measures and draft the
arbitration agreements accordingly.

It is noteworthy that with regard to the authority of the arbitral
tribunals, various terms have been used in the ICSID Convention and in
various arbitral rules, such as “recommend” in Article 47, ICSID
Convention, “recommended” in Article 39.1 of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, “grant” in Article 26.1, UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (2010
INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 241

Revision), and so on and so forth. I mean, this difference in wording is
very important in practice as arbitrators may interpret them differently.

With respect to the sovereignty of a state party and interim measures,
it is safe to say that the status of interim measures against a state has
evolved from its original formulations in the constituent documents of
international judicial and arbitral tribunals through judicial and arbitral
practice to the current debate on the matter. The classical perspective of
sovereignty is concerned here with how states reflected their mark on the
drafting of those constituent documents in the sense of the orthodox
notion of sovereignty.

It should be noted that in negotiating and drafting such constituent
documents, that is, the ICSID Convention and the ICJ statute, the state
parties were directly involved through their representations, hence
sticking to the orthodox notion of sovereignty, unlike other cases such as
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The teleological perspective of
sovereignty is concerned with how the functionality of arbitration can be
maintained by fulfilling its purpose with the notion of restrictive
sovereignty as reflected in judicial and arbitral decisions and juristic views.

The objective perspective of sovereignty shows how the sovereignty
of the state party should be looked at objectively in the context of interim
measures so that the arbitral tribunals should be respectful of the state's
basic need to exercise its sovereignty for its self-preservation and thereby
they do not stand in its way.

Now, looking at the classical notion, that is, the classical perspective
of state sovereignty, Article 47 of the ICSID Convention owes its origin to
Article 41 of the statute of the ICJ; both provisions are premised on the
same idea that the provisional measures are not mandated to be binding
on the states concerned. The drafters of those documents had in mind that
the sovereignty of the state should not be directly challenged. The drafting
history of the documents bears testimony to this fact.

A well-known writer in the field, I mean, Professor Schreuer, the
author of “The ICSID Convention: A Commentary,” notes that the
Convention's legislative history shows clearly that a conscious decision
was made not to grant the tribunal--that is, to ICSID tribunals--the power
to order binding provisional measures. It has thus been pointed out by
one writer that it is generally accepted that the choice of the word
“recommends” as opposed to the word “prescribed,” which was the
original sort of words proposed by some states, originated from the
concern that the drafters of the convention be seen as respectful of national
sovereignty by not granting power to private tribunals to order a state to
do or not to do something purely provisionally.

Now, the word “recommends” was deliberately preferred to the
word “prescribed,” that's the original suggestion by some states and
consequently, it is likely that a recommendation under Article 47 is not
binding.
242 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

Even in respect of the power of the domestic courts to enforce
provisional measures emanating from ICSID arbitration, Mr. Broches, the
lead drafter of the ICSID Convention, was said to point out that there was
no way for a private investor to obtain their specific enforcement against
the state.

It is thus clear that the sovereignty of the state party was considered
to be a factor for not making ICSID provisional measures binding on it.
However, the ICSID tribunal, in its landmark decision in the Maffezini
Case, that is, Maffezini v. Spain in 1999, pronounced the binding character
of provisional measures recommended by a tribunal.

It is well-recognized that Article 47 of the ICSID convention was
inspired by and modeled after Article 41 of the statute of the ICJ, which
provides that the court has the power to indicate if it considers that
circumstances require any provisional measures which ought to be taken
to preserve the rights of a party.

So, here, you see, in Article 41 of the Statute of the ICJ, the word
“indicate” has been used rather than “order,” for the ICJ to issue any
interim measures. Thus, except for the words “recommend” in Article 47
of the ICSID Convention and “indicate” in Article 41 of the statute of the
ICJ, the relevant parts of both the provisions are identical.

It should be noted that traditionally ICSID tribunals have followed
the ICJ jurisprudence in respect of issues concerning interim measures or
protection like many others. The reason could be that both the institutions
are based on international treaties and are concerned with public
international issues, though, in their details, they differ from each other.

There has been a great debate on the issue of the binding character of
provisional measures indicated by ICJ. Having noted various authorities,
Lawrence Collins, observed that there can be little doubt, however that the
preponderant view is that an indication of interim measures is not binding.

However, it was not until 2001 when the ICJ, for the first time, in its
historic decision in LaGrand definitively pronounced on the fate of such
indications of provisional measures that they create legal obligations.

So, that is for the first time the IC] pronounced that interim measures
should be binding on states.

Now, as that has moved on also in the case of investor-state
arbitrations defying ICSID practice that interim measures are not binding
on the state. As mentioned before, for the first time in an ICSID case (i.e.
the Maffezini case), interim measures were considered to be binding.
Various arbitral tribunals have followed suit, Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine,
Occidental Petroleum, and City Orient and Roussalis v. Romania, and Perenco
v. Ecuador. In all these cases, interim measures were declared to be
binding, and also recently in the UNCITRAL set of cases (i.e. under the
UNCITRAL Rules 1976) Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Company
v. Republic of Ecuador where first interim measure order was issued and
then it was converted into an interim award considered binding. So, that
INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 243

is not the ICSID practice. That is the UNCITRAL practice where an order
as well as an interim award can be granted for interim measures, again
you see the UNCITRAL Rules are used in investor-state arbitrations; and
again, that's a different scenario. However, the issue remains that the
state, as a party, has to be taken quite seriously because it has some public
interests and states are not like any other ordinary contracting parties,
states, you know, fulfill various public interests as a sovereign party.

So, there are issues that a sovereign has to deal with and arbitral
tribunals need to be considerate to take those issues into account;
otherwise problems might arise. Investor-state arbitration so far has, in
the majority cases, got support from the international community and also
from states, but if international arbitral tribunals ignore the needs of states,
then of course, the recent trend that you see in Latin American countries
which are pulling out from the ICSID and also BITs will be copied
elsewhere. Hopefully that trend should stop and there will be more
reasons to think seriously about the specific ways how the state
sovereignty should be dealt with, not only in respect of interim measure
issues but also in various other respects that might arise when sovereignty
poses as a big issue. There, thus remains more research to be done to
answer many such issues.

Thank you.

MR. LAIRD: Well, thank you very much, Professor.

We'll try to hold questions until the end.

I wanted to ask our next speaker, Professor Don Wallace, Jr., whom I
think you know well. He introduced the conference this morning.

Don is not only the Chair of the ILI, he is Professor Emeritus at the
Georgetown University Law Center. He has been counsel, he has been an
arbitrator, as well as an academic for many years, and has worked on
many investor-state arbitration cases. In fact, he continues to teach a
seminar with Mark Bravin and Dr. Sabahi at Georgetown on investor-state
arbitration, and they are the authors of one of the leading texts, titled,
appropriately, “Investor-State Arbitration,” published by Oxford
University Press.

So, that is to say, thank you very much, Professor, for agreeing to be
on this panel, and if I could turn over the mike to you and listen to your
words.

Prof. Don Wallace Jr., Interim Measures: Criminal Investigations
Executive Summary:

The right of a state to engage in criminal prosecution of investors
involved in illegal activities is central to its sovereign powers. A new
equilibrium has emerged in international arbitration of significant
deference to the exercise of state regulatory power. In other words, in

244 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

issuance of interim measures a balance has been struck between
preserving the rights of the Claimant and the Respondent. Article 26 of the
ICSID Convention is the source of the Claimant's right to protect the
integrity of the arbitral proceedings. Indeed, the arbitrators should not be
hampered in the exercise of their jurisdiction to prevent the Respondent
from interfering with the proceedings. However, at the same time neither
the ICSID Convention nor BITs expressly enjoin a state from exercising its
criminal jurisdiction. In light of these conflicting priorities, there is a high
standard for burden of proof the Claimant needs to meet for the tribunal to
enjoin criminal prosecutions and tribunals have to exercise an exquisite
carefulness concerning that issue since the power to prosecute crime goes
to the heart of state sovereignty. Ultimately, in light of the new
equilibrium of tribunals deferring more to government with respect to
state regulations, arbitrators have been seriously wary about issuing
interim measures to enjoin criminal prosecutions and the determination is
in practice largely factual.

PROF. WALLACE: Thanks a lot, Ian.

I don't use PowerPoint, I do bullets, but I think we've made a
PowerPoint of my bullets, and Borzu, can I impose upon you to figure out
how it works.

Okay. As I said, I don't use PowerPoint. I'll try to keep myself to ten
minutes.

Munir just spoke about sovereignty. The topic of this little talk is the
right of a state to prosecute investors involved in illegal activities. I would
say that is probably central to sovereign powers.

I'm not going to distinguish between ICSID Rules, ICSID Additional
Facility, or UNCITRAL Rules, or any others. I'm just going to talk about
the general topic.

The general criteria for interim measures in investment are similar to
commercial arbitration: irreparable harm, et cetera and so forth. However,
there is an interesting expression which is relevant to this discussion, I
think, in the ICSID Convention, Article 47, one of the purposes of interim
measures is the preservation of rights. Of course, we have the claimant or
the respondent.

And another requirement is what I call here the procedural right to
continue, in other words, to preserve the integrity of the proceeding. And
so, both parties have to be able to participate and continue.

Now, point two is different. I see you've taken the numbers
away. This new equilibrium is not from the area of interim measures.
This is the new equilibrium in investment arbitration, and to say it's
new is a little dramatic, but you know, in the beginning, everyone
thought investors won all cases. More recently it has turned out that
investors do not win all cases, and probably one of the reasons is the

INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 245

rise I would say, in deference to the state. Borzu and I teach a course
with Mark and we had a paper on indirect expropriation, regulatory
takings, and it's reasonably clear that you see in the CAFTA Rules,
you'll see it in the new model of BIT, U.S. BIT, that there's a deference--
well, at least--yes, there's a sort of deference. Space, appreciation is
given to the regulatory state power. And I think of economic
regulations, regulations for health, safety, et cetera. I would say that,
within that, you certainly have the core of the police power, which is
the power to prosecute, and I think this probably does affect, really,
where the arbitral tribunals will come out.

I should rapidly say that both David and I are counsel to the
Government of Laos and this very issue will before the arbitrators
shortly and I told David I better be careful not to say something which
will be quoted against us, so I'm going to be a little bit maybe pro-
respondent.

But so, the third point is the one--I'm sorry they're not numbered-is
this preservation of rights, in other words, to preserve the rights of both
claimants and respondents. Contention: Is there a right not to be
investigated or prosecuted, because in a sense, that's what the claimant is
arguing, that one cannot investigate or prosecute crimes by the investors,
and I'll add at the end, or the respondent's officials themselves.

And putting it that way is a little contentious, but if you think about
it, now, the heart is the right to continue to not upset the integrity of the
proceeding, and if you look at the fourth point I cite ICSID Article 26, and
that's an issue that comes up here. ICSID Article 26 says that the ICSID
proceeding is the exclusive, if you will, venue that the--this is ICSID, now,
this is not UNCITRAL--that the parties are not to resort to the courts. And
some have argued, with respect to this matter of criminal investigation,
that the respondent cannot resort to criminal investigation or prosecution,
because that's a remedy outside of Article 26. I don't think that's probably
what was intended. I think they're thinking of the ICSID--and from the
ICSID, now--is the exclusive site for the civil proceedings and not the
criminal, but that's an argument that has been made. And I quote from a
case which, in point of fact, allowed--prohibited criminal proceedings, but
nonetheless, I quote from it, and this is point four:

“Neither the ICSID Convention’--and we're talking about ICSID
now, not UNCITRAL, though I think the rules are similar, nor the BIT, in
that case--”Neither the ICSID Convention nor the BIT contain any rule
enjoining a state from exercising criminal jurisdiction.”

I mean, on the face of it, there's nothing in the overall rules or the
rules with respect to interim measures that prevents a criminal
prosecution, nor do they exempt suspected criminals from prosecution by
virtue of being investors.
246 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

I mean, to be honest, the government can clearly say, “We cannot
proceed to investigate and prosecute a crime.” Of course, the counter-
argument from the claimant will be, “Yes, but you're going to do this in
order to screw up our chances to win this case,” but the language is clear
in most of these cases. There is nothing which says the government can't
investigate and prosecute.

To be sure, I add, and this is from one of the cases, the arbitrators
should not be hampered in the exercise of their function and one needs to
protect the jurisdiction of the tribunal. In other words, the arbitrators want
to hear this case fully. They don't want the government respondent
interfering by basically putting pressure on the investors or employees, et
cetera, but nonetheless, the rule, if you will, within the norms of interim
measures is there's nothing which prevents a government from acting.

I suppose the real issue is one of fact and therefore burden of proof.
In other words, what is the heart of the proposed investigation and
prosecution? Does it somehow impact on the facts of the case? Would
prosecution interfere with the arbitrators? Would it not?

I think back to Bill Clinton--you remember Clinton versus--what was
it?--Jones, who said, “You can't let this case go forward. I won't be able to
function as President.” But you know, you can do two things at once. I
mean, the arbitrators can hear this case in a dispassionate way and still
have the government prosecuting.

Point six, and I think now we have to press a button.

In sum, and, again, quoting from one of the few cases which address
this issue, criminal investigations and measures by a state--and I add, well,
surely not out of bounds, in other words, governments require special
considerations. In other words, what I'm trying to say here is there is a
high standard for interim measures in commercial and investment
arbitration, it's rather akin to our injunction practice, irreparable harm,
likelihood of success, and so forth, but I think the few courts which have
addressed this say there's an even higher standard on the plaintiff, if you
will, the claimant for the reasons suggested really by the Professor, which
is that you are now at the heart of the sovereign power.

And the one--it's not wholly clear what the great--how should I put
it?--existential difference is, ontological difference between commercial
and investment arbitration, but the people who have had cold feet about
investment arbitration say it shouldn't be exactly like commercial
arbitrations. Well, here, you have the sovereign as the respondent. Of
course you can have that in commercial arbitration, too. Many
construction cases at the ICC involved sovereign defendants.

But nonetheless, the suggestion is that quite apart from the general
criteria for these measures, it says a most obvious and undisputed part of
the sovereign right of a state is to implement and enforce its national law
on its territory.
INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 247

And this is a quote: “This Tribunal feels that a particularly high
threshold must be overcome before an ICSID tribunal can indeed
recommend provisional measures,” and I think this tribunal did it, but the
point being you really have to sweat if you're an arbitrator to allow a
government not to proceed to investigate a crime. And by the way that all
the arguments--you've got to move fast because the evidence will be
destroyed, the statute of limitations will run, you know, all of those. But
so, I'm saying, I think there's a kind of an exquisite carefulness that
arbitrators have to exercise if they enjoin criminal prosecutions, an
understanding that they may be related to the merits of the case.

My final point is this: Even if an arbitrator is tempted to enjoin, ie.,
the recommendation or order proscribed, I think, was the language that
was going to be used in the first draft of the ICSID Rules, a criminal
investigation/ prosecution of the investor, what about the government
officials themselves? Now, of course, put them outside the political issues.
That is my last point: Investigation and prosecution of respondent
government officials, would arbitrators dare to do that? And quite
frankly, you have a change in government, quite common, which is maybe
why some of these arbitrations didn't go forward at all, and can an
arbitrator prevent a government from investigating its own people? What
I'm trying to suggest is that particularly in the light of the new
equilibrium, which is to defer more to governments, even with respect to
fairly innocuous regulations, regulations, for instance, in environment and
health, where we defer to some extent, as you can see in the notes to
CAFTA, for example, BIT agreements--not a BIT, really, it's an MIT or
something. It seems to me that when you get to criminal prosecutions, you
really have to defer to the government and, as I say, maybe the comical
case would almost be if you try to arbitrate or prohibit a government from
investigating and prosecuting its own officials. I submit not, but this a
narrow topic. It is not particularly adjudicated. There are very few cases.

Even when the arbitrators have enjoined a criminal prosecution from
going forward, they begin by saying, we don't really want to allow this
lightly, we are really worried about it. And I said, I think it became
factual, and the arbitrators will have to persuade themselves that the
criminal investigation can go forward without it interfering with their
proper arbitral process.

So, I think it will be facts and burdens of proof and, if David and I are
successful, we will make some law in this area.

Thank you.

MR. LAIRD: Thank you very much, Professor.

And apropos of that, we have next David Branson who, interestingly,
and he noted in his email to me when I asked for his bio, he didn't describe
all the fantastic accomplishments he has had for, I guess, over 30 years in
the arbitration field.
248 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

He related to me his very interesting activities for his Laos client. He
has two arbitrations coming up. He was retained in November 2012, and
the final hearings are set for June 2014. So, it sounds like a very interesting
case from little tidbits we have already heard.

But more generally, David is a Director here at the ILI of the ADR
Center and has been a great supporter of the ILI for many years, and it is a
real privilege to have David here to talk more on the subject of interim
measures in investor-state arbitration.

So, thank you, David.

David Branson, Provisional Measures and the Prevention of the
Application of a Sovereign's Tax Code to the Investor

Executive Summary:

The case of Lao Holdings, N.V. v. Lao People's Democratic Republic
under ICSID Additional Facility rules illustrates that in deciding whether
to file for provisional measures to restrain a State from engaging in
regulatory actions, which in that particular case involved the drastic
increase of the tax rate on gaming revenue, it is important to analyze the
underlying political reasons for such actions and assess whether the new
measures would realistically be enforced. In Lao Holdings, the Claimant
opened a casino in 2009 in Laos. Per the tax code at the time, the gaming
excise tax on revenue was 15 percent per year. However, the Claimant and
Responded had a flat tax agreement to expire on December 31st, 2013,
according to which the Claimant would be paying only $745,000 per
annum. At the end of 2011, the National Assembly passed a new tax code
under which the excise tax on gaming revenue was increased to 80%. At
the same time, the Claimant was unsuccessful in extending its flat tax rate.

In August 2012, the Claimant filed two BIT arbitrations not related to
the casino that it was operating. In April 2013, the Claimant filed for
provisional measures, demanding the tribunal bar the application of the
80% tax rate pending the outcome of the arbitration and extend the flat tax
provision past its expiration date until there was a final decision. The
Claimant argued this would maintain the status quo.

The Respondent, represented inter alia by Mr. Branson, did not object
to this provisional measure because the counsel analyzed the reasons for the
radical tax rate increase and concluded that the new higher tax rate would
not be enforced. The Claimant's casino was on the border with Thailand and
was aimed at foreign clients. The Respondent agreed to accept the
Claimant's provisional measures if the Claimant put the 15% tax rate in an
ESCROW account. The Claimant's counsel in response wrote prolix briefs
and provided volumes of evidence that 80% tax rate would bankrupt the
Claimant and argued that no ESCROW is necessary since the Respondent
can seize the casino if the Claimant defaulted. The tribunal found the 15%

INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 249

tax rate to be acceptable and set the monthly escrow sum at that amount as a
condition for the provisional measures. That sum would have to revert to
the government, regardless of whether the Claimant wins the case.
However, if the Claimants had done nothing, the government would
not have been able to respond in the six-month period of time anyway.
Even if it attempted to assess the 80% tax on invoicing, the government
would have to request the courts to enforce the invoice. As a result, by
filing for provisional measures and letting the tribunal set an ESCROW
amount, the Claimant was simply faced with extra expenses, not including
the additional legal fees, it would have otherwise not have had to pay.
Thus, the lesson is that in asking for provisional measures against a State's
threatened actions, it is important to assess the reality of such measures
being enforced within the local regulatory system to spare the unnecessary
costs associated with requesting provisional relief from investment treaty
tribunals. Editorial Note: The parties in the case have reached a settlement.

MR. BRANSON: Thank you very much.

I had a short bio because faux humility is so unbecoming, anyway,
and I'm too old to be humble.

I'm going to do something different: I'm going to set the stage for
what happened in this Laos arbitration with regard to provisional
measures, and then I'm going to take a few minutes and ask this side of a
room to make a recommendation to me, the client, on what they should
ask for on provisional measures, and then I'll ask this side of the room to
represent the government and say how you would react.

Now, it's best if we start--we gave the associates a chance to speak
first, because we don't want to embarrass the partners.

Okay, here's the stage: The claimant opened a gambling casino in
2009. The current tax code in 2009 set the gaming excise tax at 15 percent
and the VAT of 10. Now, the 15 percent is on revenue, not profit, but the
claimant was granted a flat tax agreement for a period of five years. The
flat tax amount was set at $745,000 per annum and the flat tax agreement
expired on December 31st, 2013.

In early 2011, three years before the flat tax would expire, the
claimant learned the government was planning to amend the tax code.
The first proposal was to increase the gaming tax to 30 percent. Again, on
revenues. The claimant sought to extend the FTA at a similar tax rate as in
the original. At the end of 2011, the tax code was amended and the FTA
was not extended.

The National Assembly passed the new tax code in December 2011.
The excise tax on gaming revenue was set at 80 percent--that's revenue,
plus there was a 10 percent VAT on top of that.

The claimant was unsuccessful at having the FTA extended. In
August 2012, the claimant filed two BIT treaty arbitrations, one under the

250 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

PRC Laos BIT 1993, and the other under the Netherlands BIT, 2005. The
PRC BIT only allows claims for expropriation.

The PRC notice of arbitration alleged that three projects were
expropriated, none related to the casino that was operating.

The Netherlands BIT notice of arbitration made two unfair and
inequitable treaty claims, but there was no mention of the 80 percent tax.

In April 2013, the claimant filed for provisional measures, demanding
the tribunal bar the application of the 80 percent tax pending the outcome.

We responded there wasn't any claim in the notice of arbitration, so
they have to amend their notice before we have to respond.

Now, the claimant then agreed to amend its pleading to assert the tax
and a schedule was set calling for a hearing on September 1, 2013.

Now, here is what I want the claimants to tell me: All right, the
notice of arbitration is filed in 2012, you have a status conference with the
arbitrators in the spring of 2013 and they tell you that you can have a
provisional measure hearing in September of 2013. The merits hearing is
set for June of 2014. So, what relief do you ask for if you want to move for
provisional measures?

[Pause. ]

MR. BRANSON: You don't know because you work for the
government.

Okay, I'll let a senior, brilliant partner answer the question.

SPEAKER: I would ask for an extension of the flat tax, because
obviously the imposition of the tax is going to wipe out what remaining
investments my long-suffering client has.

MR. BRANSON: Okay. So, Alex says, extend the--he wants to have
the arbitrators order that the flat tax agreement should be extended
through the end of the arbitration while they consider the merits of the
validity of the 80-percent tax, right?

Okay. Who agrees with that? Who would think of some other type
of remedy that they could ask for?

SPEAKER: So, you might ask that you could pay for the flat tax at
the end of 2013 but then go back to the tax rate that existed at the time of
investment through the end of the arbitration.

MR. BRANSON: So, you would--as a claimant, you wouldn't be
piggy and ask for the extension of the flat tax agreement through 2014.
You would say, “We're willing to pay the tax code rate of 15 percent
through the pending of the percent.

Now, would you do that instead of asking for Alex's more severe
relief?

SPEAKER: [Off microphone.] Because, I assume that I'll be arguing
to manage expectations where, at the end of the flat tax period, I would be
paying 15 percent--so, I don't know enough about tax--

MR. BRANSON: That's all--these are the only facts: There is an 80
percent tax and there used to be a 15 percent tax.
INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 251

SPEAKER: Then, I would manage expectations at the time I made
the investment was 15 percent tax rate, I would--

MR. BRANSON: So, your position really is you want to be
reasonable to the arbitrators. You don't want to ask for too much.

What would be the justification, Alex, for asking for an extension of
the flat tax agreement?

SPEAKER: Remind me what the flat tax agreement provided for.

MR. BRANSON: Oh, it's just a--without regard to revenue, the
casino simply pays 67,000 a month for five years. It doesn't matter
whether they had a billion dollars of revenue or no revenue.

SPEAKER: Do, we know what percentage that approximates?

MR. BRANSON: Yes, by this--well, in the beginning, nobody knew,
because there was no prior income stream. By this time, the casino was
grossing about seventy-five million a year. So, it was paying less than 1
percent in tax.

SPEAKER: So, part of my reasoning in thinking about the 15 percent
tax rate is that you're essentially trying to preserve the status quo.

So, in the absence of this new tax measure, the rate would revert to
the 15 percent. So, I'm trying to be reasonable but I'm also trying to ask the
tribunal to preserve the same affairs absent the new tax regime.

SPEAKER: David, forgive me by not focusing on the facts--when
was the agreement going to expire?

MR. BRANSON: The end of 2013. And the arbitration final hearing
is here.

Let me ask you this--

SPEAKER: How about asking for the agreement to remain in place
through the end of 2013 and then you revert to the tax of 15 percent?

MR. BRANSON: Okay. Well, everybody agreed the agreement
stayed in place through the end of 2013. So, the only question is, what
happens on January 1, 2014?

SPEAKER: I think Rachael may be right.

MR. BRANSON: That's what the arbitrator would say. You're
supposed to be the claimant.

SPEAKER: I would put the money that has to be paid in an
ESCROW account until the hearing.

MR. BRANSON: How much money?

SPEAKER: The full payment; otherwise what are you--

MR. BRANSON: The 80 percent? Okay.

Let's go to the other side. What should the respondent do in this
case? The other side has made a motion for provisional measures.

Who wants to tell me what the respondent should do? The
application was made the way Alex described it. They wanted provisional
measures and they wanted to have no tax after 2014, but, alternatively, to
extend the flat tax agreement for the life of the arbitration. What should
the respondent do?
252 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

SPEAKER: Just really quick, David, because I want to revive Alex's
point because I think you would argue that there should have been an
extension of the FTA is what I think I would try to argue as a claimant if
you can argue those facts. There's not enough facts here to say whether
there was an improper denial of an extension of the FTA, especially if there
were other FTAs granted to other people similarly situated, but that would
get you back to Alex's flat tax argument, but I think what Aurelia says is
entirely right, because I think that you're--as a respondent, my initial
reaction would be, this is the tax, they're paying the tax, I'm a sovereign,
I'm allowed to pass this sort of tax, there's not been a showing that the tax
is improper at that point, you should pay it.

Alternatively, if you're not going to pay it, put it into ESCROW,
because at the end of this, what I'm going to find out is you're going to
take your investment, you're going to go gambling in Manila where things
are really taking off, and I'm going to be stuck with my revenue that I
should have gotten over the course of time.

So, I think initially I would say pay it, but as an alternative I would
certainly take Aurelia's suggestion.

MR. BRANSON: So, let me ask this question: Who thinks the 80
percent tax is defensible?

MR. GERNANDT: Can I say, coming from Sweden?

[Laughter. ]

MR. BRANSON: But that's on income. This is on revenue.

MR. GERNANDT: Yes, but we are cutting our taxes, now.

MR. BRANSON: I'll show you what now happened.

The claimant argued the tribunal should order that the claimant
should be allowed to extend the FTA payment past January until there was
a final decision. The claimant argued this would maintain the status quo.

Brigitte Stern looked at the counsel for the claimant and said, “No,
the status quo was that the flat tax agreement ends December 31, 2013.”
The status quo would be you pay 80 percent tax. So, the claimant then had
another argument.

Well, what we did, we didn't object to provisional measures. The
reason we didn't object to it is because I decided when I first saw the 80
percent tax that nobody would ever enforce it. You can't have an 80
percent tax on revenues, particularly because there were two other casinos
that didn't pay tax. Well, one of them had a flat tax agreement and paid
less than this one and the other one was on a military reservation and
didn't pay tax. So, nobody is going to enforce this 80 percent tax, but
developing governments don't react quickly. It took us a long time to
figure out why there was an 80-percent tax. And it turned out that there
was an 80 percent tax because this casino was in the second-largest town in
Laos, Savannakhet; it was on the border with Thailand.

There is a law in Laos that Laotian people cannot gamble, and it's
illegal for the gaming house to let them come in and gamble. However, this
INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 253

casino operator let Laotian people come in and gamble for five years. Laos
is a very poor country. People can't afford to gamble. The bankruptcies, the
divorces, there were murders. It was causing great havoc.

So, what we did, by the time we got to a week before the hearing,
which was in September, I convinced the government that we weren't going
to enforce the 80 percent tax, but for the purposes of the hearing we would
go to a 15 percent tax. So, we said, as long as they put the 15 percent in
ESCROW, we would accept the provisional measures. So, at the hearing--
now the other thing we did--by the way, when you're a claimant and you
ask for something like this, you have to realize what could happen.

The claimant spent about $500,000 in legal fees writing briefs about
this, 50 pages of briefs saying these are the standards for provisional
measures. I wrote three pages in total, and I said, of course they're entitled
to provisional measures in certain circumstances. This isn't one of them
because they haven't proven that they'll be bankrupt. There's no evidence.
They just said, it's 80 percent, it's too much. And then, my last one said,
we'll give them 15 percent.

So, they came to the hearing and they introduced two exhibits at the
hearing to prove that they would go bankrupt. So, they gave us the P&L
statement for 2013 which showed that they would have revenues of 65
million. So, I said, “Thank you very much. 15 percent of 65 million is 10
million. That's what you owe. Put 10 million into the ESCROW account
and the government will be happy.” They also introduced the Sands-
Macao annual report and I have no idea why they did it but I read the
whole thing and in one page it said that, in Macao, the excise tax on
revenue was 39 percent. So, our 15 is totally reasonable.

Now, so, they introduced their 2013 revenue statement and showed
they would gross 65 million and then they showed all their expenses and if
they applied the 80 percent tax they would go bankrupt. So, we, thank
you very much, we said the monthly ESCROW should be $800,000. The
claimant then argued that no ESCROW was necessary, because if it later
defaulted on tax payments, we could seize the casino. I thought that's an
extreme way to collect tax.

However, the tribunal stated that because the 15 percent was
acceptable and they said the claimant's own financial analysis would yield
a tax liability of 10 million, taking into account the claimant's assets, it set
the amount at 429,000 due each month.

They started in January putting $429,000 into an ESCROW account in
Singapore. It has to revert to the government, doesn't matter whether we
win or lose the case. Why? Because when we filed on the merits, we said
we're going to repeal the 80 percent tax. The next National Assembly
meets in June two months from now and they will repeal the tax and
replace it with a 30 percent tax.

So, in the meantime, the ESCROW account now has 1.7 million and
it's all going to revert to the government. So, what did the claimant get?
254 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

They got to put 450,000 a month into an ESCROW account. If they had
done nothing, the government would not have been able to respond in this
six-month period of time, because they know and we know that if the
government assesses the 80 percent tax on a monthly basis by invoicing,
they can't collect it. In the Lao's system, and the claimant knew this from
prior experience, the government would have to go to court to enforce the
invoice, and that would take a year-and-a-half. So, the possibility of the
government ever collecting any tax after January 1, 2014 was nil.

By filing for provisional measures and letting the tribunal set an
ESCROW amount of whatever it was simply giving away money that they
didn't have to give away.

That's it.

Now, I think the lesson is when you ask for something like
provisional measures, you really have to think it through. What are you
asking for? What are you going to get? Just because you ask to extend the
flat tax agreement doesn't mean rational people are going to extend it.

In this case, the arbitrators--in fact, Teddy made a good point about
what is the--should the flat tax agreement have been extended in a normal
negotiation? The flat tax agreement had a term in it. The last sentence of the
agreement said the parties at the end of the five years will meet and
negotiate for a new agreement in good faith. So, claimant argued that that
meant you had to extend it, but the Chair of this Tribunal is a Canadian
Supreme Court Justice and he looked at the lawyer for the claimant and he
said, “That sentence is an agreement to agree. It's not a binding obligation.”

So, by asking for provisional measures, they're going to end up, if the
arbitration takes all of 2014 for the arbitrators to render their award, they'll
end up with $5 million in an ESCROW account that they wouldn't have
put in there.

Thank you.

PROF. WALLACE: After we win on the merits.

MR. BRANSON: Of course we're going to win on the merits.

Mr. Wallace is going to win that part of the case. I just deal with
these little things.

MR. LAIRD: Thank you very much, David. We look forward to
seeing how things evolve in the Laos arbitrations and we'll follow that
closely and see what happens in 2014-2015.

Our last speaker is Dr. Claudia Frutos-Peterson, who is a partner in
the Washington, D.C. office of Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle and
works with Dr. Sabahi.

She was formerly counsel at ICSID from 2001 to 2009. So, some of
you may have met her in that context. Now, she is representing
governments in investor-state arbitration. She is an adjunct professor at
American University, Washington College of Law, and she lectures there
on commercial arbitration and investor-state arbitration.
INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 255

She's going to talk about irreparable harm in the CEMEX case as the
basis of her talk.

Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Provisional Measures and the Notion of
Irreparable Harm: the Cemex Case

Executive Summary:

It is safe to say the investor-state arbitration tribunals have granted
provisional measures when it has been proven that they are urgent and
necessary to avoid “irreparable harm” under Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention and Article 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. However,
several decisions do not follow precisely those criteria, with a number of
tribunals departing from the “irreparable harm” requirement and
adopting the lower standard of “harm not adequately reparable by an
award of damages.” The Burlington v. Ecuador tribunal decided to follow
that standard derived from the UNCITRAL Model Law and weighed the
prejudice to both parties. Perenco v. Ecuador and City Oriente v. Ecuador
tribunals went so far as to question the existence of the “irreparable harm”
requirement under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Article 39 of
the Arbitration Rules and played down the “necessity” requirement in
favor of “urgency.” City Oriente in particular concluded that it is not
essential that interim measures be “necessary” and that harm to be
prevented by them must “significant” rather than “irreparable”. However,
the CEMEX decision rendered in the wake of Burlington, Perenco and City
Oriente surveyed and analyzed previous case law and concluded that
ICSID tribunals, including Burlington and Perenco, have effectively
followed the “irreparable harm” criterion for necessity of interim measures
and that this is the generally accepted standard for issuing such measures
in both the International Court of Justice (ICJ) jurisprudence and ICSID
tribunal practice which justifiably follows ICJ interim measures case law.
In light of the CEMEX decision and post-CEMEX cases confirming the
CEMEX holding, the trend of the less-demanding standard of assessment
of risk for issuing interim measures derived from the UNCITRAL system
influencing ICSID arbitration is overstated.

DR. FRUTOS-PETERSON: Thank you, Ian.

Today, I want to explore a little bit about irreparable harm as one of
the requirements for an ICSID tribunal to grant provisional measures. But
unfortunately, my presentation will not be as entertaining as David's
presentation.

As you know, there is a debate on whether or not irreparable harm is
a requirement for an ICSID tribunal to grant provisional measures. I will
submit that it is a requirement. I think it is clear under Article 47 of the
ICSID Convention and also the ICSID case law that tribunals have

256 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

followed the interpretation that the International Court of Justice has
rendered with respect to provisional measures.

So, and to do this, I want to bring to your attention, and discuss a
little bit, the CEMEX decision on provisional measures, which was
rendered by the Tribunal in the CEMEX v. Venezuela case, and in particular
because I think the CEMEX decision is one of the decisions that clearly
analyze not only the different requirements that are necessary for an ICSID
tribunal to grant provisional measures but also the standard that needs to
be applied when interpreting irreparable harm.

I think the CEMEX decision is a good example of how tribunals could
make the analysis on the provisional measures requirements under Article
47 of the ICSID Convention.

In my opinion--and I apologize, I was not here this morning, so I did
not have an opportunity to hear the presentations, but maybe you had a
chance to discuss the requirements on provisional measures under
international commercial arbitration, and contrast that approach--because,
in my view, there is a difference--with investor-state arbitration cases
under ICSID.

But I think it is safe to say, from the discussions we are having here
today, that ICSID Tribunals have granted, in the context of investment
arbitration, provisional measures when it has been proven that there is
urgency and necessity to avoid irreparable harm, just to use the words of
the Occidental versus Ecuador Tribunal.

However, there are a few decisions that have been rendered in the
context of the ICSID Convention that do not follow precisely those criteria.
These are the cases of Burlington v. Ecuador, Perenco v. Ecuador, City Oriente
v. Ecuador, all of these cases rendered under the ICSID system.

However, it is really important to put things in context. For example,
when you read the Burlington decision, without really going into the facts
of the case, you have the impression that the Tribunal departed from the
applicability of the irreparable harm as interpreted in the Occidental v.
Ecuador case, which was decided before the Burlington case.

The Burlington Tribunal indicated that they were going to adopt --and
these are the words of the tribunal—”the standard of harm not adequately
reparable by an award of damages, and the Tribunal also said, and I quote,
“to use the words of the UNCITRAL Model Law.” The Tribunal further
indicated that they were going to weigh the interest of both parties to
assess the necessity requirement. So, when you look into this, you have
the impression that the Tribunal is not applying the highest standard test
that the big majority of ICSID tribunals have followed in provisional
measure applications.

It is interesting that the Burlington Tribunal took the time to try to
distinguish the previous case law, in particular, the case of Occidental. And
in that respect the Tribunal made the point that its case was a different
case, that it was not a case of damages as it was argued in the Occidental
INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 257

case. According to the Tribunal, the Burlington case was different because
the facts were different. In Burlington, the claimants still had an
investment in Ecuador, and if the measure was to be taken by Ecuador—in
other words, if Ecuador were to enforce the invoices—the payments of
which they had requested from the claimants, that will represent a risk of
the destruction of the ongoing investment and of its revenue-producing
potentially, for both parties.

So, as you can see, the Tribunal took the position of not only looking
at the standard from the point of view of the UNCITRAL Model Law but it
also balanced the interests of both parties.

In Perenco, the facts of the case are similar to the facts in Burlington —
because these are cases that occurred when Ecuador was taking certain
measures in the hydrocarbon sector. In Perenco, the Tribunal analyzed the
language of Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration
Rule 39 concluding that, even though these articles were based on Article
41 of the status of the International Court of Justice, it is not expressly clear
that there is a requirement such as irreparable harm. The Perenco Tribunal
said that Article 47 does not lay down a test of irreparable loss and the
authorities do not warrant so narrow an interpretation.

The Tribunal based its reasoning on its analysis of urgency as the
only requirement. And in that respect the Tribunal said, and I quote:
“provisional measures may only be granted where they are urgent because
they cannot be necessary if, for the time being, there is no demonstrable
need for them. Provisional measures will be granted if they are necessary
at the time of the decision to preserve the effectiveness and integrity of the
proceedings and avoid severe aggravation of the dispute.”

So, again, the Tribunal took a slightly different position in the sense
that, not only they were saying, “What do you mean? There is nothing in
the text of Article 47. We should then concentrate on the urgency of the
measure.” For the Perenco Tribunal necessity will also apply but the
importance of the matter is how urgent the matter really is to grant and
preserve the rights of the parties.

Finally, we have City Oriente v. Ecuador. In that case, the Tribunal was
very straightforward in its interpretation of the requirements. The
Tribunal said, “The only requirement arising from the wording of Rule 39
is the traditional urgency requirement.” This requirement is analyzed by
the Tribunal in several paragraphs of its decision, and then the Tribunal—
by recognizing urgency, just as the Perenco decision did, asked the
question whether there is a requirement in addition to urgency to be
fulfilled, in other words whether provisional measures must be necessary
to prevent irreparable harm.

The City Oriente Tribunal concluded that it is not essential that
provisional measures are necessary to prevent irreparable harm, but that
the harm must be significant and that it would need to exceed greatly the
damages caused to the party affected thereby.
258 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

In light of these cases, there are some commentators that have raised
the question of whether there is really a requirement such as irreparable
harm in the reading of Article 47 of the ICSID Convention.

As I said, I take the position that there is one, but before I move to the
discussion of the CEMEX decision, I wanted to say that, when preparing
for this presentation, I of course read the article by Professor Gabrielle
Kaufmann-Kohler and Aurelia Antonietti, here with us.

The article is, of course, a very comprehensive article, and if you
haven't read it, I really invite you to read it, because it really analyzes the
case law on the subject of provisional measures.

What I think is interesting from the article is that the authors based
their analysis on two systems, the ICSID arbitration system and the
UNCITRAL arbitration system as those are the most prominent systems
for investment arbitration.

By looking into those systems, the authors, in my opinion, seem to be
establishing that ICSID tribunals have applied a stricter approach to the
definition of irreparable harm that departs from the interpretation that the
International Court of Justice has made in that respect.

And they raise the question of whether a less-demanding standard
used in international commercial arbitration or in investor-state arbitration
under the UNCITRAL Model Law—or under the UNCITRAL Rules,
would influence the practice of international arbitration under the ICSID
system.

And remember, when we are talking about the standard under the
UNCITRAL Rules, we are talking about harm not adequately reparable by
an award of damages which, as I just mentioned to you, is what the
Burlington Tribunal decided to follow, even though it was a case under the
ICSID Convention.

So, in my opinion, when we talk about what is going on the subject of
provisional measures in investment arbitration, I think, that’s the center of
the discussion, in the sense of whether the standard applied in
international commercial arbitration, which is not as rigid as what we have
in investor-state arbitration under the ICSID system, is really something
that is influencing the investor-state arbitration system under ICSID.

I personally think that’s not the case. As I was saying, Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler and Aurelia Antonietti, are wondering whether those
decisions are going in that direction, whether we will see a change in trend.

In my view, the CEMEX Tribunal was confronted with that question
in the sense that when they decided the case, the decisions in Burlington
and Perenco were already rendered. So, when you analyze the CEMEX
decision you see that the Tribunal started from the point of view that
Article 47 of the ICSID Convention has been inspired by Article 41 of the
Statute of the International Court of Justice. The Tribunal then analyzes
what are the criteria that the International Court of Justice has applied
when indicating or taking a measure on provisional measures.
INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 259

For the CEMEX Tribunal it is clear that the ICJ has followed the
criteria of urgency and necessity, and when assessing necessity, one needs
to assess the risk to avoid irreparable harm.

The Tribunal referred to the Nuclear Test decision and a couple of
other decisions from the ICJ that support that position.

After that, the Tribunal analyzes some of the prior ICSID decisions on
provisional measures, in particular the ones that I have mentioned today,
and in that respect, the Tribunal concludes that, at the end of the day, even
if Burlington and Perenco seemed to have applied a more relaxed kind of
test, if we want to call it that way, or not as rigid as we have seen in ICSID
arbitration, the effects are the same. So, in so many ways, for CEMEX
those tribunals recognize that you couldn't grant a provisional measure
unless there is irreparable harm.

I checked the ICSID decisions rendered after CEMEX, to see how
CEMEX—the line of interpretation discussed in CEMEX, was or was not
followed by subsequent ICSID Tribunals. Until this point, the case law
continues to be well settled in the sense that tribunals continue to talk
about irreparable harm in the way that has been interpreted by the
CEMEX Tribunal. They continue to cite the standard used by the Occidental
Tribunal: “urgency and necessity to avoid irreparable harm.”

In Abaclat, for example, the Tribunal took the position that, even if
one would consider that Article 47 of the ICSID Convention does not
establish specific requirements for provisional measures, that Article gives
the Tribunal a lot of freedom for consideration. The Abaclat Tribunal
concluded that irreparable harm is one of the criteria that the Tribunal
needs to take into consideration when issuing a decision on provisional
measures.

Those are the ideas that I had in mind to bring to the discussion. It
would be great if we can have some sort of roundtable during the
questions and answers to continue the discussion on these issues.

Thank you.

MR. LAIRD: So, thank you very much, Claudia. That was a really
good way to finish off the panel, to root us in the case law and establish
where the standards seem to have developed.

I think we have time for a few questions and discussion. It's been
such a good panel that I wouldn't want to not have a bit of input and
reaction from the audience.

PANEL3:;O0 &A

QUESTION: An actual clarification of the case, David: Wasn't the
expropriation done in 65 percent instead of--the expropriation, I'm sorry,
wasn't that 65 percent? So, originally, after the flat tax, it would revert
back to 15 percent, right? I might be wrong.
260 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

MR. BRANSON: Well, the tax code had changed in 2011. And so, if
you applied the tax code in 2014, it would be 80 percent.

We volunteered to accept 15 percent for the purposes of the
ESCROW engagement during the course of the arbitration. But at the end
of the arbitration, whatever the tax code is, will be applied. We're going to
change the tax code to make it 30 percent.

QUESTION: And that's revenue again?

MR. BRANSON: That's revenue. It's an excise tax, plus 10 percent
VAT, right.

But that's--in the gaming industry, that's not an unusual tax, 39
percent, 40 percent.

MR. DE GRAMONT: So, this is a question for Professor Wallace.

There's at least one case where a tribunal found that a criminal
prosecution investigation violated the FET (fair and equitable treatment)
standard, that's the Rompetrol v. Romania case.

And I'm wondering if the facts of that case came before a tribunal on
an application for provisional remedies, whether that particular fact
pattern or perhaps a more extreme fact pattern might be such that a
tribunal might grant provisional remedies in the context of a criminal
prosecution.

PROF. WALLACE: I think I protected myself by saying I'm ignorant,
and I did say it's a factual question. In other words, assuming “ix no pace”
[phonetic] to Claudia, assuming the irreparable harm standard, the
question is, will the claimants be irreparably harmed if the prosecution
goes forward? And that's a fact question. It depends on what they're
going to prosecute, it depends how it interferes with the claimant's
preparation of the case.

And there is one case--I think, is it Quiborax v. Bolivia where they did
say the prosecution would cause irreparable harm because they were
prosecuting the claimants--it involved forgery, the very thing which was
the basis of the claim. They said, no, it's not forgery. The government said
it is forgery and we're going to go after you.

So, I think it really depends--and I don't even know the facts that well
in our own case, quite frankly, as to—I think it's factual. But I would say--
because I mentioned this very high standard. It's a super-high standard
over and above irreparable harm. It's the heart of sovereignty. I'm trying
to remember, you know, patriotism is the last refuge of the scoundrel, so
sovereignty, which I don't know what it means, but it is used a lot in 2014,
so, presumably the tax power is greater than even the ordinary regulating
the environment, for which we also show deference. So, it would really be
a factual question. Can the prosecution--can the claim go forward in the
presence of a criminal prosecution, and I think the arbitrators have to bend
over backwards to say it can, but that's the burden of proof which I
mentioned, that the burden of proof will be on the claimant to show that
this will so foul up their claim.
INTERIM RELIEF IN INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 261

And David has pointed out before that they can't collect taxes that
quickly. Is it clear they can prosecute that quickly? Probably yes, but
investigate —I really do think it is a fact question, but the presumption, it
seems to me, has to be in favor of the state, that it should be able to go
forward. It is an essential function to be able to enforce your laws, but
there are—and every arbitrator says that, but they say, in this case, we will
enjoin--because they're going to get— because the prosecution is so close to
the facts—the facts that it's dealing with, are the facts that the claimant
wishes to establish otherwise.

So, my own judgment, if I were an arbitrator is it's a fact question, it's
a presumption, it's against the claimant, but that presumption can be
overcome if there is a “high threshold,” which is the language used in one
of these cases, that is surmounted.

MR. BRANSON: Can I add one thing.

One of the interesting things about considering the state taking
criminal prosecution action while an arbitration is pending is that the
statute of limitations for the criminal activity goes on for years. The
arbitration is going to be over.

So, what does the tribunal think it's going to do in our case if they
say, well, for the next six months, the government can't investigate
criminal bribery that occurred in Laos?

PROF. WALLACE: One of the principal defenses of the government
would be that this is an illegal investment, do you follow me? Its seven
investments, seven projects, that do not comply—you know, these
standards do not comply with the local law and therefore are, in a sense,
really impregnated with corruption, et cetera, from the beginning. So, the
investigation and prosecution are not wholly unrelated, quite frankly, to
the heart of the government's defense.

So, we'll see whether Justice Binnie, I guess, who is tough as hell,
how he'll look at this, but I think it would be a good litigation-oriented
judge who should decide this matter. Actually, we are seeking an
amendment of the provisional order. So, the question of who has the
burden of proof might be —

MR. BRANSON: This will be decided on May 12th.

MR. PALIWAL: I'm Suyash Paliwal with White & Case. My
question builds a little bit on Claudia's comments and then some of the
other comments about the irreparable harm standard and, in general, the
relationship between Article 47 and Article 41 of the ICJ statute.

If there is a difference in standard whether or not the irreparable
harm is a requirement, should there be a different standard when one of
the parties is an individual investor or private party compared to a state-
to-state arbitration?

Do you feel that there is a need for an irreparable harm standard in
one situation but maybe not so much the other just because of the different
interests of the parties?
262 INTERIM & EMERGENCY RELIEF IN INT’L ARBITRATION

PROF. WALLACE: I mean, the decision has been--we're not
legislators, maybe you wish to be. I think the decision has been, hasn't it,
in the ICSID Rule, the term “irreparable harm” is used.

Now, stepping back grosso modo, what should it be?

Claudia.

[Laughter. ]

DR. FRUTOS-PETERSON: Thank you.

I think you can sense my answer. My answer is—no, those are the
rules of the game. With the recent decision in the Pulp Mills case, the Court
was quite clear and really, if there was any doubt about it before or even in
connection with the decisions rendered by the Permanent Court of
International Justice, I think this case clarifies this issue.

MR. MANIRUZZAMAN: To add to Claudia's comments, well, I
mean, if there is an opportunity for monetary damages, there cannot be
any irreparable harm, because that is well-established in the ICSID
jurisprudence as well as the ICJ jurisprudence.

I mean, if you can compensate for the harm, there is no question of
irreparable harm.

DR. YESILIRMAK: I think, in answer to your question, Professor,
no, it should not be used.

PROF. WALLACE: What should not be used?

DR. YESILIRMAK: Well, the standard of irreparable harm should
not be used for investor-state arbitration. It goes to your comment, as well,
because on one side, we have a state, with immense resources, and on the
other side we don't have always an investor with immense resources. So,
we have to protect investors. I believe drafters of the rules, I believe, were
not as bold as drafters of the ICSID Convention. They should have kept
the standard law.

PROF. WALLACE: You said, in a sense, it can be high because there
would be no damage, but because evidence can be destroyed, et cetera, but
you're saying it should be law.

DR. YESILIRMAK: It should have been law left —

PROF. WALLACE: What difference to the standard?

DR. YESILIRMAK: Not irreparable harm, it's too high.

Next time, hopefully, we will discuss that.

MR. LAIRD: Okay, on behalf of the panel, thank you for your
attention and excellent questions, and I'd like to ask everyone to thank our
excellent third panel.

[Applause. ]

[End of third panel.]

[Brief recess. |
