CHAPTER 2

General Principles of Law on the Legal Force of
Provisional Measures in International Investment
Arbitration

Federico Lenci

General principles of law are often presented as a quite recent source in public
international law. However, since the 19th century international arbitral tribunals
applied certain principles which were considered to be the expression of general
principles. Such source fulfils an important function in the investment regime as
well. Indeed, general principles of law fulfil a ‘gate-keeping’ function by way of a
legitimacy control on arbitral rule-making power, meaning that the evolution and/or
consolidation of the arbitral case law shall not be incompatible with the principles
which are the expression of the main legal systems of the world. An example of such
role is given with regard to the issue of provisional measures, in particular their legal
force.

In the present chapter it is argued that, despite the departure in ICSID case law from
the ordinary meaning of Art. 47 of the 1cs1D Convention providing for the tribunal’s
power to issue merely hortatory provisional measures, such departure is legitimised by
1CSID member States’ acquiescence thereto amounting to an informal modification of
the treaty — as Prof. Gazzini and Prof. Kolb convincingly argue — and by the fact that
it is not incompatible with the principles which are the expression of the main legal
systems of the world.

If arbitration is a ‘mechanism with teeth, provisional measures are its front
teeth.

1 Some Remarks on General Principles of Law and Their Role in the
Debate on the Sources of Law in the Investment Regime

General principles of law are often presented as a quite recent source in public
international law, having been introduced for the first time in the early 1920s,
in particular in the PcIj Statute. However, this proposition does not seem to be
entirely accurate. Indeed, throughout the 19th century international arbitral tri-
bunals derived the applicable rules also from the principles which such tribunals

© KONINKLIJKE BRILL NV, LEIDEN, 2018 | DOI 10.1163/9789004368385_003

26 LENCI

considered to be the expression of general principles.! Moreover, as indicated
by Balladore Pallieri, no State had ever objected nor even hesitated about the
appropriateness of its inclusion in the PctJ Statute.” Said inclusion is consid-
ered to be a victory of natural law theorists against the positivists. Since it was
established by a positive norm, namely treaty law, it obliged many positiv-
ists to either reconsider their theories on this point or to deem Art. 38, para.
1, lett. c of the pc1y Statute as an exceptional norm, being the principles of
law excluded in their views from the true sources of international law.? Actu-
ally, the origins of this source were identified in the widespread conceptions
which existed in the majority of national legislations.* However, the impact
of said ‘victory’ of natural law theorists should by no means be overestimat-
ed, since the preponderant role of treaty and custom has not been seriously
questioned since the early period of codification of the general principles,®

1 Albert de La Pradelle, La Justice Internationale. Cours pour le doctorat en droit des gens de
la Faculté de droit de Paris (19e lecon, Paris 1933) 3—5: ‘Est-il donc exact qu'une disposition
nouvelle ait été ici introduite? Peut-on admettre que, dans la période antérieure au statut
de la Cour, les tribunaux arbitraux n’avaient pas a connaitre des principes généraux du droit
pour en faire application? Raisonner ainsi, c’est manifestement une erreur. En effet, l’histoire
de la jurisprudence internationale montre d’une maniére tout a fait nette que, pendant tout
le XIXe siécle, il a été fait application de principes que la jurisprudence considérait comme
étant l’expression des principes généraux. [...] Car ce texte a été élaboré par le Comité des
Dix, dans des conditions dont jai déja eu l'occasion de vous parler, et il n'est jamais entré dans
la pensée des jurisconsultes qui le composaient, qu’ils pouvaient, par une semblable disposi-
tion, introduire une innovation quelconque. Leur pensée — et, puisque j’en ai été le témoin, je
crois étre bien qualifié pour l’'apprécier — était simplement de recueillir le droit international
déja existant.’

See also the declaration made by the President of the Committee of Jurists: ‘The applica-
tion in practice of the rules mentioned by the President, is moreover constant in interna-
tional jurisdictions’ (Cour permanente de justice internationale, Comité consultatif des juristes,
Procés-Verbaux des séances du Comité, 310, available at the IcJ institutional website: http://
www.icj-cij.org/files/permanent-court-of-international-justice/serie_D/D_proceedings_of_
committee_annexes_16june_24july_1920.pdf — last accessed 9 March 2018).

2 Giorgio Balladore Pallieri, / principi generali del diritto riconosciuti dalle nazioni civili nellart.
38 dello Statuto della Corte permanente di giustizia internazionale (Torino, Istituto giuridico
della Regia Universita 1931) 65.

3 For some critical remarks of this approach, see Mario Scerni, | principi generali di diritto ri-
conosciuti dalle nazioni civili nella giurisprudenza della Corte permanente di giustizia inter-
nazionale (Padova, Cedam 1932) 31 ff.

Giorgio Balladore Pallieri, quoted supra footnote 2, 14.

5 Hersch Lauterpacht, Private Law Sources and Analogies of International Law (with Special Ref-
erence to International Arbitration) (London, Longmans, Green and Co. Ltd. 1927) 67; Mario
Scerni, quoted supra footnote 3, 40 f:: ‘Se il caso concreto da risolvere é tale, che il sistema

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
THE LEGAL FORCE OF PROVISIONAL MEASURES 27

although according to some authors they constituted the very essence of in-
ternational law.®

Such an inclusion entailed a significant consequence on the representation
of international law: indeed, instead of constituting a mosaic of merely volun-
tary norms establishing rights and duties between States and thus a plurality
of international legal orders,’ international law had to be conceived as a so-
cial system aiming at the achievement of the superior goals of humanity. This
quality of international law had already been suggested by some authors, in
particular by Bluntschli. In his Le Droit international codifié, Bluntschli gave
a definition of international law as not being limited to govern the relations
between States, but rather as aiming at the protection of general rights of
individuals:

Le droit international est l'ensemble des faits et des principes reconnus
qui réunissent les divers Etats en association juridique et humanitaire, et
qui assurent en outre aux citoyens des divers Etats une protection com-
mune pour les droits généraux résultant de leur qualité d’homme.®

Bluntschli’s conception of international law embodies this fundamental func-
tion towards individuals which has to be performed by States, in particular
by civilised nations, which ‘sont plus particuliérement appelées a développer le

risultante dalle convenzioni e dagli usi, comunque interpretato ed elaborato, non da modo

di trovare la norma apposita, allora e soltanto [italics in the original text, A/N] allora la Corte

potra invocare il n. 3 dell’art. 38 e giudicare secondo “i principi generali di diritto riconosciuti

dalle nazioni civili.”

6 See, inter alios, Albert de La Pradelle, quoted supra footnote 1, 10 f.: ‘En réalité, les principes
généraux de droit ne sont pas une source supplémentaire, mais bien la source méme du droit
international.

7 Giorgio Balladore Pallieri, quoted supra footnote 2, 6 and references cited therein.

8 Johann Caspar Bluntschli, Le droit international codifié (Paris, Guillaumin 1886) 55.

g In that period, the distinction between ‘civilised’ and ‘uncivilised’ nations still existed. How-
ever, in Bluntschli’s conception, far from constituting a privileged group of nations, the
‘civilised’ nations on the contrary had a particular duty to contribute to the human advance-
ment of international society, for the benefit of the individuals. This conception was far from
evident: some authors suggested that International Law was a favourable body of law which
only applied to the relations between ‘civilised’ nations. As Carlos Calvo (Derecho internacio-
nal tedrico y practico de Europa y América (Tomo primero, Paris, D’Amyot 1868, 70) reminds:
‘Muchos autores han calificado el derecho internacional como publico européo, 6 han
limitado su significacion a los pueblos cristianos 6 que marchan a la cabeza de la civilizaci6n’
[footnotes omitted].

The shift from right/privilege to duty is quite striking.

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
28 LENCI

sentiment des droits communs a l’humanité.© From these passages it is easy to
recognise the intellectual basis of what would become, a few decades later, Art.
38, para. 1, lett. c of the Pcry Statute.

Some igth century international lawyers, in particular those of English na-
tionality" and those of the German Historical School of Jurisprudence, identi-
fied a source which bore a certain resemblance with the general principles of
law as to foundation and method of ascertainment, namely Roman Law. Indeed,
said source had found widespread application in different national legal systems
of the world and therefore it was considered as deriving from the intellect.

The rationale for the inclusion of the general principles of law in the list of
Art. 38 of the pcIJ Statute is well known: in particular, Baron Descamps, Presi-
dent of the Committee of Jurists who drafted the pci Statute, had insisted on
the necessity to avoid the potential risk of non liquet? and finally had managed
to put his colleagues within the Committee on his side. Therefore, the function
of this source is that of filling gaps between international law rules, completing —
together with conventional and customary norms — the system of the main
sources in the international legal order.'*

This chapter focuses on the function fulfilled by general principles of law
concerning provisional measures in international investment arbitration, with
particular regard to a specific issue within this topic, namely their legal force.
The purpose consists in an attempt at clarification of the relationship between
the role of the case law of international tribunals and the contribution of the
general principles of law in the investment regime concerning provisional
measures.

The theoretical legal framework of the present study is that international
investment arbitration is inscribed within public international law.

The analysis of the sources of this rapidly developing area of international
law is of utmost relevance: indeed, the sources have a direct impact on the
framework of the investment regime and on shape and content of the norms

10 Johann Caspar Bluntschli, quoted supra footnote 8, 57.

11 Robert Phillimore, Commentaries Upon International Law (2nd edition, London, Butter-
worths 1879) 34; John Westlake, International Law (Vol. 1, Cambridge, CUP 1904) 15.

12 Carlos Calvo, quoted supra footnote 9, 80.

13 Cour permanente de justice internationale, Comité consultatif des juristes, Procés-Verbaux
des séances du Comité, 318 and annex ‘Speech of Baron Descamps on the Rules of Law to
be applied, 322-325 (available at the IcjJ institutional website quoted supra footnote 1).

14 Indeed, the list in said Art. 38 also contains, in para. 1, lett. d ‘subject to the provisions of
Article 59, Judicial decisions and the teachings of the most highly qualified publicists of
the various nations, as subsidiary means for the determination of rules of law’. Further-

more, such list is by no means complete: as an example, it does not contain unilateral acts.

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
THE LEGAL FORCE OF PROVISIONAL MEASURES 29

which stakeholders will interpret and apply.’ In this connection, it is submit-
ted that general principles of law play a fundamental role in increasing the
overall legitimacy of investor-State arbitration, in the form of control on arbi-
tral rule-making power.

2 Application of the Method Set Forth by Art. 38, Para. 1, Lett. c
of the 1cy Statute to Provisional Measures in International
Investment Arbitration

It is common knowledge that the institution of provisional measures does not
constitute a novel phenomenon within the mechanisms of international dis-
pute settlement. As a matter of fact, this type of incidental proceedings derives
its origin from the common — though differentiated — practice in national legal
orders. To analyse the evolution from national to international fora in this re-
spect and distinguish every characteristic and consequent peculiarities is not
the purpose of the present study: indeed, while the domestic/international di-
vide between legal orders may play a role as a descriptive tool, the exercise of
drawing analogies!® thereupon shall be conducted with caution in this field!”
and may lead to limited results as to the type of provisional measure, as the
‘compulsory/voluntary’ jurisdiction binomial would impair the capability to
grasp the peculiar features of the institution in international proceedings.!®

15 On the relevance of general principles of law to the substance of the investment regime,
see Stephan Schill, ‘General Principles of Law and International Investment Law’ in Tarci-
sio Gazzini and Eric De Brabandere (eds), International Investment Law. The Sources of
Rights and Obligations (Martinus Nijhoff Publishers 2012) 136-138.

16 Hersch Lauterpacht, quoted supra footnote 5.

17.‘ In this sense, see Shabtai Rosenne, Provisional Measures in International Law. The Inter-
national Court of Justice and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (Oxford, OUP
2005) 4.

18 As noted by Jerzy Sztucky, Interim Measures in The Hague Court (Kluwer 1983) 15 f:: ‘In
other words, for all practical purposes, national courts are never confronted with the
need to pronounce on interim protection in uncertainty as to whether there will be any
instance competent to adjudicate upon the merits [...] On the international level the situ-
ation is different. First of all, the competence of international tribunals is always more or
less narrowly defined ratione materiae. Even in the exceptional case of the Court whose
jurisdiction potentially extends to the whole area of international law, it is considerably
limited in practice by the scope of consent of the prospective litigants’ and at p. 3: ‘In-
deed, beyond the most general propositions as to the purpose of interim measures, such
as those quoted earlier [in particular, to prevent any development from rendering the

judgment nugatory, A/N], there is no universal common pattern of provisional measures

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
30 LENCI

In cases where specific provisions on provisional measures as to conditions,
purposes and types of measures are lacking in the applicable treaty text, it is
argued that a two-steps approach is warranted as to their proper application in
international investment arbitration.

The first step shall consist in the analysis of the case law of investor-State
arbitral tribunals concerning provisional measures, coupled’? with that of the
analogies and differences emerging from public international law courts and
tribunals.

As asecond step, general principles enter into play. Indeed, they fulfil a func-
tion which may be considered from the negative perspective, meaning that the
evolution and/or consolidation of the arbitral case law shall not be incompat-
ible with the principles which are the expression of the main legal systems of
the world. Such a threshold is undoubtedly lower than the one which could
hypothetically be applied in this regard, namely that issuing or denying a given
provisional measure in a specific case should be consistent with the general
principles of law.

I shall give an example of the practical application of such second step.
A worldwide Mareva injunction consists in an interlocutory order, restraining
the addressee from disposing of assets held in any part of the world. It is a very

in domestic legislation, which might be borrowed for general application on the inter-
national level. Even if there were such a pattern, one would have to be very cautious in
drawing municipal law analogies in international law, since the conditions for exercising
judicial power on the international level are quite different from those existing in domes-
tic legal systems’ [footnotes omitted].

On the arbitrariness to which the misapplication of this source may lead, see Angelo
Piero Sereni, Principi generali di diritto e processo internazionale (Milano, Giuffré 1955) 8:
‘E da notare, in alcuni di tali studi, la tendenza ad affermare l’esistenza di “principi” che
in realta non sussistono o ad ampliarne arbitrariamente il contenuto e la portata, caden-
dosi cosi in una forma di giusnaturalismo dottrinale che é, a mio sommesso avviso, non
soltanto errata ma anche contraria ad una sana e realistica valutazione ed allo sviluppo
del diritto internazionale’ Sereni demonstrated and concluded in this monograph (pp.
16—93) that there are no general principles of law under Art. 38, para. 1, lett. c Icj Statute
in the whole field of procedure and evidence.

19 Indeed, this is a valuable source of materials from where general principles of law can be
derived, through the intermediation of the analysis drawn by international courts and tri-
bunals. See, in this sense, Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law as Applied by International
Courts and Tribunals (Cambridge, CUP 1953) 1 and Jerome Elkind, Interim Protection.
A Functional Approach (Martinus Nijhoff Publishers 1981) 15; see also the recent mono-
graph Charles T. Kotuby, Jr., Luke A. Sobota, General Principles of Law and International
Due Process (OUP 2017).

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
THE LEGAL FORCE OF PROVISIONAL MEASURES 31

powerful tool, indeed.2° However, should an investment tribunal be confront-
ed with the question whether it has the power to issue such a provisional mea-
sure an inescapable step would be to assess whether the latter is part of the
general principles of law according to Art. 38, para. 1, lett. c of the Icy Statute.
In other words, before issuing said measure, the investment tribunal should as-
sess whether the main legal systems of the world recognise it. Then, is it so? Ac-
cording to a survey conducted by the EU Commission in the context of judicial
cooperation and provisional measures — thus, within the limited scope of EU
jurisdictions — while worldwide Mareva injunctions are generally recognised
in common law countries (plus France and Germany), they are not available in
many civil law countries, namely Austria, Belgium, Finland, Greece, Italy, Lux-
embourg, The Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and Sweden.?! As a consequence,
in the current state of national legislations as indicated above, the issuance of
worldwide Mareva injunctions by an investment tribunal would be contrary to
the general principles of law.

Said role as a ‘gate-keeper’ of the rule-making power of the international
adjudicatory organ is a key factor in increasing the legitimacy of the process
and fulfilling the function of law as an instrument of social ordering.

3 General Principles of Law on Provisional Measures before the
Adjudicator: The Legal Force of Provisional Measures

Before addressing the issue of the legal force of provisional measures, refer-
ence to the consolidation of arbitral precedents in investment arbitration is
deemed appropriate. Starting from the beginning of the new millennium, we
are witnessing a true ‘baby-boom’* of international investment arbitration.
Said phenomenon is due to a combination of factors, among which - as a
temporal sequence — the following general steps: fall of the communist

20 + On the potentially prejudicial effect on third parties and the jurisprudence of English
Courts see Lawrence Collins, Provisional and Protective Measures in International Litiga-
tion (Recueil des cours de ‘Académie de La Haye, Vol. 234, No. 3, Martinus Nijhoff Publish-
ers 1992) 117 ff.

21 EU Commission, Provisional Measures: Classification and the Trans-border Context, 04,
available online: http://ec.europa.eu/civiljustice/publications/docs/prov_measures_1_
en.pdf (last accessed 9 March 2018).

22 The expression has been introduced by Stanimir Alexandrov in a leading article on the
theme: ‘The “Baby Boom” of Treaty-Based Arbitrations and the Jurisdiction of Ics1pD Tri-
bunals. Shareholders as “Investors” and Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis’ [2005] 4 The Law
and Practice of International Courts and Tribunals 19.

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
32 LENCI

ideology and, consequently, generalised endorsement of the Washington
consensus;** worldwide proliferation of a web of BITs, generally providing for
international arbitration under the auspices of ICSID or ad hoc arbitration un-
der the UNCITRAL rules as main dispute settlement mechanisms in addition
to recourse to local courts; in such an investment-friendly climate — or, at least,
apparently so — the flow of outward investments increases significantly,**
bringing with it the related increased ratio of disputes, for the main reason
that these systems proved to be effective and relatively less costly in terms of
legal certainty, time and expenses.

Arbitrators in the investment framework constantly refer to previous deci-
sions either in support of their interpretation and application of the law, or in
order to oppose their solutions, or thirdly to harmonise and propose new paths:
in each of these three approaches, arbitrators contribute to the development
of international investment arbitration through consolidation of the adjudica-
tion process. As a matter of fact, investment tribunals tend to follow previous
decisions even if they do not deem to be compelled to do so.”° It should also
be kept in mind that arbitrators are inclined to refer to previous decisions due
to the submissions of the parties, which try to substantiate their case through
an abundant — sometimes excessive*® — reference to previous decisions. It is
argued that — with some exceptions, particularly in the ranks of commercial
arbitrators — they consider their role as being not limited to the arbitral settle-
ment of the dispute?’ before them: they deem that their role is also that of
setting the general investment framework, a task which is beneficial not only

23 For an in-depth analysis from the special perspective of the eminent negotiator of Us
BITs in the 1980s and 1990s, Kenneth Vandevelde, Bilateral Investment Treaties: History,
Policy and Interpretation (Oxford, OUP 2010).

24 Adetailed account thereof is provided for by José Alvarez, The Public International Law Re-
gime Governing International Investment (Recueil des cours de l’‘Académie de La Haye, Vol.
344, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers 2009, also published in pocketbook form, AIL, 2011) 17.

25 Diego Fernandez Arroyo, ‘Los precedentes y la formacion de una jurisprudencia arbitral’
in Emmanuel Gaillard and, Diego Fernandez Arroyo (eds), Cuestiones claves del arbitraje
internacional (Bogota and D.c. 2013) 236: ‘Sin embargo, ni los autores ni los arbitros pare-
cen convencidos de la obligacién de seguir la jurisprudencia. Los arbitros la siguen, como
veremos, pero en general lo hacen sin creer que estén obligados a ello.’

26 Emmanuel Gaillard, ‘Foreword’ in Emmanuel Gaillard and Yas Banifatemi (eds), Prec-
edent in International Arbitration (New York 2008) 3.

27 By ‘arbitral settlement of the dispute’ reference is made to the first, fundamental but not
final, step towards the real settlement of the dispute, ie. the moment in which either
the claimant manages to enforce the award declaring in its favour, or the award denying
compensation or — less frequently — restitutio in integrum to it acquires its res iudicata
state and the respondent manages to cover its expenses and legal fees.

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
THE LEGAL FORCE OF PROVISIONAL MEASURES 33

to the parties of that specific dispute, but to the whole international invest-
ment community (investors and host States alike). Such element sets a sig-
nificant divide between international investment arbitration on the one side,
international commercial arbitration on the other: indeed, it has been demon-
strated that, as far as the latter is concerned, arbitrators refer significantly less
often to previous decisions.?®

Paraphrasing Professor Gaillard, who aptly says that ‘arbitration is a mecha-
nism with teeth,2? I submit that provisional measures are arbitration’s front
teeth.

In order to address the issue of the legal force of provisional measures in
international investment arbitration, ie. whether they have a binding or hor-
tatory force, and whether the general principles of law play a role therein it is
deemed appropriate to start from ICSID arbitration. The relevant provision
is embodied in Art. 47 of the IcsID Convention,*° which reads as follows:

28 Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, ‘Arbitral Precedent: Dream, Necessity or Excuse?’ [2006] Ar-
bitration International 362 f; in the same sense and referring to the author abovemen-
tioned see also Diego Fernandez Arroyo, quoted supra footnote 25, 241: ‘Los resultados
de la investigacion dirigida por una profesional de dilatada experiencia — que es ademas
una de las personas que mas se ha ocupado de este tema — al menos, reflejan que si en
general la autoridad reconocida al precedente jurisprudencial depende de las materias y
de las cuestiones especificas tratadas, en el arbitraje comercial internacional lato sensu
los arbitros hacen lo que quieren 0, segun las circonstancias, lo que pueden, siendo la pro-
porcion de casos en los que se citan laudos anteriores relativamente pequenia’ [footnotes
omitted].

29 Economist, Now Try Collecting, article on the $50bln-award in the Yukos case, published
on 2 August 2014, whose first lines read as follows: ‘Russia breached its obligations under
an energy treaty when it seized the assets of Yukos in 2006; so it must pay the former oil
giant’s majority shareholders $50 billion. The award, made on July 28th by an interna-
tional arbitration court in The Hague, was 20 times the previous record for such a case.
The investors’ lead lawyer, Emmanuel Gaillard of Shearman & Sterling, says it shows that
arbitration is “a mechanism with teeth.”

30 _—_In the literature see, in particular, Sam Luttrell, ‘Ics1D Provisional Measures ‘In the
Round’ [2015] Arbitration International 393; Dan Sarooshi, ‘Provisional Measures and
Investment Treaty Arbitration’ [2013] Arbitration International 361; Gabrielle Kaufmann-
Kohler, Aurélia Antonietti, ‘Interim Relief in International Investments Agreements, in
Katia Yannaca-Small (ed), Arbitration under International Investment Agreements: An
analysis of the Key Procedural, Jurisdictional and Substantive Issues (Oxford, OUP 2010) 767
ff; Loretta Malintoppi, ‘Provisional Measures in Recent IcsID Proceedings: What Parties
Request and What Tribunals Order, in Cristina Binder, Ursula Kriebaum, August Reinisch,
Stephan Wittich (eds), International Investment Law for the 21st Century. Essays in Honour
of Christoph Schreuer (Oxford, OUP 2009) 157; Rodrigo Gil, ‘IcsID Provisional Measures to
Enjoin Parallel Domestic Litigation’ [2009] World Arbitration & Mediation Review 535 ff;

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
34 LENCI

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers
that the circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures
which should be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party
[emphasis added, A/N].

Following the objective interpretation of the ordinary meaning of the treaty
text pursuant to Art. 31, para. 1 of the VCLT, one may be inclined to dismiss in
limine the issue, concluding that IcsID tribunals are not empowered to issue
binding provisional measures. Additionally, may I refer to the travaux prépara-
toires of the Convention:*! indeed, the Working Paper, the Preliminary Draft
and the First Draft provided for the arbitrators’ authority to prescribe*? provi-
sional measures.*? As noted in Prof. Schreuer’s Commentary, the delegate from
China opposed such an extended power, due to the concern that the State party
to the dispute might be unable to abide by the provisional measures prescribed
for reasons of ‘necessity on national policy.* Following a vote thereupon, the
term ‘recommend’ substituted the term ‘prescribe’ by a large majority.*5

Under these circumstances, le débat serait clos. Indeed, one may fail to
understand a departure from such a clear meaning of the treaty text and its
drafting history.2° However, in the last eighteen years ICSID tribunals have de-
veloped a very interesting case law in this regard.

The first case in the IcsID framework where the word ‘recommend’ was explic-
itly deemed to be of equivalent value to the word ‘order’ was Maffezini v. Spain.>”

Régis Bismuth, ‘Anatomy of the Law and Practice of Interim Protective Measures in Inter-
national Investment Arbitration’ [2009] Journal of International Arbitration 773 ff; Paul
Friedland, ‘Provisional Measures and csp Arbitration’ [1986] Arbitration International
335 ff.

31 Fora thorough analysis of the drafting history of the Convention in relation with provi-
sional measures, see Charles Brower and Ronald Goodman, ‘Provisional Measures and
the Protection of IcsID Jurisdictional Exclusivity against Municipal Proceedings’ [1991]
ICSID Review 440 ff.

32 The term ‘prescribe’ is contained in Art. 290 of the UNCLOS.

33 World Bank Publication, History of the 1cs1p Convention (Vol. No. 1, D.C. 1970) 206.

34 Christoph Schreuer et al, The 1cs1p Convention. A Commentary (2nd edition, Oxford, OUP
2009) 764 (referring to the History quoted supra footnote 33 (Vol. No. 2) 515, 518, 655, 813.

35 History of the 1cs1p Convention, quoted supra footnote 33 (Vol. No. 2) 814 ff.

36 _— In this sense, see Tarcisio Gazzini and Robert Kolb, ‘Provisional Measures in IcsID Arbi-
tration from “Wonderland Jurisprudence” to Informal Modification of Treaties’ [2017] The
Law and Practice of International Courts and Tribunals 177-80.

37. Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, 1cStD case No. ARB/g7/7, Decision on Pro-
visional Measures dated 28 October 1999, para. 9 (reported in Spanish, the only official
version): ‘9. Si bien existe una diferencia semantica entre la expresiédn “recomendar”

empleada en la Regla 39 [ée., the ancillary provision on provisional measures which is

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
THE LEGAL FORCE OF PROVISIONAL MEASURES 35

This decision was harshly criticised: by way of example, one of its most deli-
cate comments was that the Maffezini case evidenced that ‘this concern of the
drafters of the Convention [ée. to avoid attributing the power to issue binding
provisional measures to ICSID tribunals, A/N] was set aside by less respectful
ICSID tribunals.38

Such decision has to be inserted in a broader context, in which dates and
the temporal succession of events play a significant role. One year before said
decision, the cj had made an important step forward as to the binding force
of provisional measures, explicitly referring to its power to order provisional
measures — whose teleological legal argument was later developed in the judg-
ment in the LaGrand case — while issuing an indication of provisional mea-
sures whereby the United States should halt the procedure which were to lead
to the execution of a Paraguayan citizen named Breard.%9

It is noted that the Court was induced to refer to an increased power*® (al-
though the Court refrained from adopting it fully) due to obvious humanitarian

contained in Art. 39 of the 1cs1D Arbitration Rules, A/N] y la expresion “dictar” utilizada
en otras partes de las Reglas para describir la facultad del Tribunal para exigir a una parte
que realice una accion determinada, dicha diferencia es mas aparente que real. Incluso
debe observarse que el texto de esa Regla en castellano utiliza, ademas, la expresion “dic-
tacion.” El] Tribunal no considera que las partes en el Convenio hayan querido establecer
una diferencia substancial en el efecto de estas dos palabras. La autoridad del Tribunal
para decidir sobre la adopcién de medidas provisionales no es menos obligatoria que la
de un laudo arbitral definitivo. Por consiguiente, para los efectos de la presente Resolu-
cidn Procesal, el Tribunal estima que la palabra “recomendar” tiene un valor equivalente

ym?

al de la palabra “dictar.” In its most relevant part, the unofficial English version reads: ‘
[...] the Tribunal deems the word “recommend” to be of equivalent value as the word “or-
der.” All references to the text of the IcSID cases are available at the ICsID institutional
website.

38 Yves Fortier, ‘Interim Measures: An Arbitrator’s Provisional Views’ [2008] FL 6.

39 Vienna Convention on Consular Relations (Paraguay v. United States of America), Provi-
sional Measures, Order of 9 April 1998, 1c] Reports 1998, 248 ff., (see in particular paras. 36
and 41). See also LaGrand case (Germany v. United States), Provisional Measures, Order of 3
March 1999, 1c] Reports 1999, 15 f., (in particular paras. 23 and 29).

40 According to art. 41, para.1 1cJ Statute (Art. 41, para. 1 PCIJ Statute was integrally repro-
duced in the rcy Statute): “The Court shall have the power to indicate, if it considers
that the circumstances so require, any provisional measures which ought to be taken to
preserve the respective rights of either party’ [‘La Cour a le pouvoir d’indiquer, si elle
estime que les circonstances l’exigent, quelles mesures conservatoires du droit de chacun
doivent étre prises a titre provisoire’ |.”

It has been noted that there is a slight difference in terms of force of provisional mea-
sures (Shabtai Rosenne, quoted supra footnote 17, 29). Indeed, the term ‘ought to be taken’
seems to be less compulsory than ‘doivent étre prises’; in addition, a clearer indication of
the fact that the English version was drafted in a more deferential fashion in this sense is

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
36 LENCI

reasons, since in that case — followed within a period of less than five years by
the LaGrand* and Avena** cases — human life was at stake. The Maffezini case

given by the second paragraph of the article at issue, wherein reference is made to mea-
sures which are ‘suggested, whereas in the French version there is no such soft expres-
sion. The IcJ stated in the LaGrand case that the two texts were not in ‘total harmony’
(LaGrand case (Germany v. United States), Judgment of 27 June 2001, 1c] Reports 2001, 466,
501, para. 101).

The text of this article historically derives from art. 4 of the Bryan treaties with China,
France and Sweden (Shabtai Rosenne, quoted supra footnote 17, 24): “The Court shall
have the power to indicate, if it considers that the circumstances so require, any provi-
sional measures which ought to be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party.
Pending the final decision, notice of the measures suggested shall forthwith be given to
the parties and the Council’ [‘In case the cause of the dispute should consist of certain
acts already committed or about to be committed, the Commission shall, as soon as pos-
sible, indicate what measures to preserve the rights of each party ought in its opinion to
be taken provisionally and pending the delivery of its report’ ].’

However, the first part of the two articles differs: in art. 41 of the PclJ Statute reference
to the temporal framework in which these measures can be issued is lacking. The Bryan-
treaty version was manifestly linked to the main concern for which provisional measures
were provided for, namely the risk of the use of force pendente lite. Actually, on the occa-
sion of the Drafting Committee’s twenty-eight meeting on 20 July 1920, Raul Fernandes,
one of its members, had successfully proposed to reproduce the provision contained in
the Bryan treaties in its integrality. However, later on Professor Ricci-Busatti, italian repre-
sentative thereto, finally managed to persuade the majority that the temporal limitation
at issue should be removed, in order to extend the breadth of provisional measures (PCI,
Advisory Committee of Jurists, Documents Presented to the Committee Relating to Exist-
ing Plans for the Establishment of a Permanent Court of International Justice, 1920, final
text as approved by the Sub-Committee, 169).

41 —_LaGrand case (Germany v. United States), Judgment of 27 June 2001, 1cJ Reports 2001, 466,
501, para. 101. See also paras. 103 and 109, in which the Court referred to ‘the existence of
a principle which has already been recognized by the Permanent Court of International
Justice when it spoke of “the principle universally accepted by international tribunals
and likewise laid down in many conventions ... to the effect that the parties to a case must
abstain from any measure capable of exercising a prejudicial effect in regard to the execu-
tion of the decision to be given, and, in general, not allow any step of any kind to be taken
which might aggravate or extend the dispute” (Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgaria,
Order of 5 December 1939, P.c.1.J., Series A/B, No. 79, p. 199).

[...] 109. Thus, the Court has reached the conclusion that orders on provisional mea-
sures under Article 41 have binding effect.’

42 Avenaand Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States of America), Provisional Mea-
sures, Order of 5 February 2003, Icy Reports 2003, 77 ff., para. 59.

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
THE LEGAL FORCE OF PROVISIONAL MEASURES 37

is a clear example of the extent to which Ics1D tribunals are influenced (at an
increasing pace) by the construction of public international law as interpreted
and applied by the cj. Such a cross-fertilisation,** so far unilateral,** is one
of the manifestations of the fact that the investment framework is inscribed
within public international law.

In addition, the precise meaning of the travaux préparatoires has to be ex-
plained in more detail. Indeed, the debate about the legal force of provisional
measures was determined by the opportunity to incorporate decisions grant-
ing provisional measures in the form of an interim award, for the purpose of
enforcement. Eventually, such option was rejected and the legal force of said
decisions reduced.* It is quite easy to understand the intersection between the
plan of the legal force of provisional measures and that of their enforcement.
Curiously indeed, the same dynamic occurred in the debate upon the estab-
lishment of the Pcij, where eventually the term ‘indicate’ substituted the term
‘order.*° Therefore, the drafting history of the recommend/order binomial is to
be read as favouring the interpretation of the binding legal force of provisional
measures, to which nobody within the Drafting Committee had objected.

Other references are contained in its ancillary instrument, namely the Arbi-
tration Rules, adopted by the Administrative Council of the Centre according
to Art. 6, para. 1 lett. c of the IcsID Convention: Art. 39 provides that

(1) At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party may request
that provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be recom-
mended by the Tribunal. The request shall specify the rights to be pre-
served, the measures the recommendation of which is requested, and the
circumstances that require such measures.

(2) The Tribunal shall give priority to the consideration of a request made
pursuant to paragraph (1).

43 On the issue of cross-fertilisation in relation to the perspective of the theory of inherent
powers, see Chester Brown, “The Inherent Powers of International Courts and Tribunals’
[2005] BYBIL 195 ff; see, more generally from the same author, A Common Law of Interna-
tional Adjudication (Oxford, OUP 2007).

44 On the issue of one-way reference by IcsID tribunals to the jurisprudence of the Icy,
see Alain Pellet, ‘The Case Law of the Icy in Investment Arbitration’ [2013] Ics1D Review
229 ff.

45 History of the 1cs1p Convention, quoted supra footnote 33 (Vol. No. 2) 338 ff. See also Paul
Friedland, ‘Ics1p and Court-Ordered Provisional Remedies: An Update’ [1988] Arbitra-
tion International 163; Christoph Schreuer et al, quoted supra footnote 34, 765 f.

46 See Cour permanente de justice internationale, Comité consultatif des juristes, Procés-
Verbaux des séances du Comité, quoted supra footnote 1, 278.

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
38 LENCI

(3) The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on its own ini-
tiative or recommend measures other than those specified in a request. It
may at any time modify or revoke its recommendations.

(4) The Tribunal shall only recommend provisional measures, or modify or
revoke its recommendations, after giving each party an opportunity of
presenting its observations.

(5) Ifa party makes a request pursuant to paragraph (1) before the constitu-
tion of the Tribunal, the Secretary-General shall, on the application of
either party, fix time limits for the parties to present observations on the
request, so that the request and observations may be considered by the
Tribunal promptly upon its constitution.

(6) Nothing in this Rule shall prevent the parties, provided that they have so
stipulated in the agreement recording their consent, from requesting any
judicial or other authority to order provisional measures, prior to or after
the institution of the proceeding, for the preservation of their respective
rights and interests.

In this regard, it has to be noted that the term recommend is contained in para-
graphs 1, 3 and 4, ce. in the early provisions; instead, in the other two paragraphs
(paragraph 5, included in 2006; paragraph 6, included in 1985) such reference
is lacking. On the contrary, paragraph 6 adopts the term order in relation to
domestic courts, to which the parties may have recourse with requests for pro-
visional measures (provided the existence of a written agreement to that ef-
fect). | consider such inclusions as a further indication of the binding force of
ICSID provisional measures: the different character of imperium may otherwise
produce a harmful effect to the general framework of this dispute settlement
mechanism. Such difference of imperium would mean that in the context of
concurrent jurisdiction there would be a threat to the integrity of proceedings
and to the very adjudicatory function of the arbitral tribunal, since the arbitral
tribunal would be subordinated to the authority of domestic courts in relation
to fundamental aspects of fair administration of justice. This would run con-
trary to one of the main features of Icsi1D tribunals, namely their autonomy
from external, potentially politically-biased, interference.

Art. 47 of the 1cs1pD Additional Facility (ar) Arbitration Rules*’ provides for
both orders and recommendations:

47 On 27 September 1978, the Administrative Council of the Centre authorized the Secre-
tariat to administer at the request of the parties concerned certain proceedings between
States and nationals of other States falling outside the scope of the Ics1D Convention. It
concerns three groups of proceedings: 1 — conciliation or arbitration proceedings for the

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
THE LEGAL FORCE OF PROVISIONAL MEASURES 39

(1) Unless the arbitration agreement otherwise provides, either party may at
any time during the proceeding request that provisional measures for the
preservation of its rights be ordered by the Tribunal. The Tribunal shall
give priority to the consideration of such a request.

(2) The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on its own ini-
tiative or recommend measures other than those specified in a request. It
may at any time modify or revoke its recommendations.

(3) The Tribunal shall order or recommend provisional measures, or any
modification or revocation thereof, only after giving each party an op-
portunity of presenting its observations.

(4) The parties may apply to any competent judicial authority for interim or
conservatory measures. By doing so they shall not be held to infringe the
agreement to arbitrate or to affect the powers of the Tribunal.

The origin of these Rules prevents an automatically analogic reading of its text
in combination with the Ics1ID Convention and the Arbitration Rules; however,
it constitutes a relevant element in the appropriate construction of the evolv-
ing nature of arbitrators’ interim powers. These indications shall be inserted in
the broader context of public international law adjudication, comprising the
law and practice of the Icy, ITLOS, ECtHR and Iran-us Claims tribunals. In this
regard, it has been submitted that a general principle of international law has
emerged from such evolutions.*8

Arbitral tribunals in some cases do not even feel the necessity to refer in
detail to previous decisions in order to establish their binding power: for ex-
ample, the Ics1D tribunal in Tethyan Copper v. Pakistan, immediately after
quoting Art. 47 of the IcsID Convention, affirmed in the same paragraph that
‘thus, there is no question that the Tribunal has the authority to order pro-
visional measures to preserve a party’s right’;*9 it is also worth mentioning
that the tribunal in Perenco v. Ecuador referred to IcsID tribunals’ inherent

settlement of investment disputes arising between parties one of which is not a Contract-
ing State or a national of a Contracting State; 2 — conciliation or arbitration proceedings
between parties at least one of which is a Contracting State or a national of a Contracting
State for the settlement of disputes that do not directly arise out of an investment; 3 —
fact-finding proceedings.

48 Antonios Tzanakopoulos, ‘Provisional Measures Indicated by International Courts: Emer-
gence of a General Principle of International Law’ [2004] Revue Hellénique de Droit in-
ternational 53.

49  Tethyan Copper v. Pakistan, 1cSID case no. ARB/12/1, Decision on Claimant’s request for
provisional measures dated 13 December 2012, para. 114 (see also para. 120, on the fact that
the power to order provisional measures is generally recognized); see also Tokios Tokelés,

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
40 LENCI

power, coupled with a vast collection of precedents in public international law
adjudication.>°

It is also noted that so far parties to IcSID arbitration have not raised the
issue of manifest excess of powers on this aspect as a ground for annulment
pursuant to Art. 52 (1) (b) of the Ics1D Convention, which may be considered
as a further element of acceptance of arbitrators’ binding power.

As to the attitude of IcsID member States with regard to such departure
from the ordinary meaning of the treaty text of Art. 47 of the Ics1D Conven-
tion in arbitral case law, Prof. Gazzini and Prof. Kolb convincingly argue that
the lack of reaction to or the acquiescence in such case law has led to an in-
formal modification of Art. 47 in the sense of allowing the issuance of binding
provisional measures.°!

In this regard, the fact that an adjudicatory organ has the power to issue
binding provisional measures constitutes a general principle of law, as the
large majority of the legal systems of the world indicate.

Therefore, despite the departure in ICSID case law from the ordinary mean-
ing of Art. 47 of the IcsID Convention providing for the tribunal’s power to
issue merely hortatory provisional measures, such departure is legitimised by
ICSID member States’ acquiescence thereto amounting to an informal modi-
fication of the treaty and by the fact that it is not incompatible with the prin-
ciples which are the expression of the main legal systems of the world.

Turning to ad hoc international investment arbitration, Art. 26 of the 2010
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides for interim measures, an expression
analogous to that of provisional measures in the IcsID framework. This version
has been significantly expanded in comparison to the corresponding article in
the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. Mr. Castello, who actively participated
in both working groups that carried out the reform of the UNCITRAL Arbitra-
tion Rules and the Model Law,°? explains that the main reason consisted in
the necessity to seek cooperation from domestic courts where said measures
had to be decided upon and/or enforced and to their idiosyncrasy to do so if
the scope of the arbitrator’s power was broad (since they read it as unclear).*3

ICSID case no. ARB/o2/18, Order no. 1 on Claimant’s request for provisional measures
dated 1 July 2003, para. 4.

50  Perenco v. Ecuador, 1cS1D case no. ARB/o8/6, Decision on provisional measures dated 8
May 2009, paras. 67-77.

51 ‘Tarcisio Gazzini and Robert Kolb, quoted supra footnote 36, 180-183.

52  Art.17 of the Model Law deals with interim measures.

53 James Castello, ‘Generalizing about the Virtues of Specificity: The Surprising Evolution of
the Longest Article in the UNCITRAL Model Law’ [2012] World Arbitration and Mediation

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
THE LEGAL FORCE OF PROVISIONAL MEASURES 41

Conditions, purposes and atypicalness of provisional measures are con-
tained, respectively, in paragraph 3,54 paragraph 2 letters (a)-(b)-(c)-(d)>° and
paragraph 2, alinea 1.°°

The binding force of interim measures is not expressly affirmed in the first
paragraph in a clear form: indeed, the arbitral tribunal may grant interim mea-
sures; however, paragraph 2 contains a description of the content of interim
measures, specifying that the tribunal orders said measures. The form in which
the measure is granted — be it an award or an order — may have an impact on
its enforceability, not on its binding force, which appears to be more clearly
expressed than its counterpart in the Ics1D framework.>”

The form containing a decision on interim measures is not provided for
in Art. 26. Undoubtedly, interim measures issued in the form of awards are
more likely to be enforceable than orders, since the 1958 New York Convention
on the recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards only refers to
‘awards.°® A reason for such a reticence with regard to the form of the deci-
sion on interim measures was due to the fact that, since awards are final, this

Review 7; Ibid., ‘Unveiling the 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules’ [2010] Dispute Resolu-

tion Journal 21.

54 ‘The party requesting an interim measure under paragraphs 2 (a) to (c) sh:

(a) Harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages is likely to result if the mea-
sure is not ordered, and such harm substantially outweighs the harm that is likely to
result to the party against whom the measure is directed if the measure is granted; and

(b) There is a reasonable possibility that the requesting party will succeed on the merits
of the claim. The determination on this possibility shall not affect the discretion of the
arbitral tribunal in making any subsequent determination.

55 ‘(a) Maintain or restore the status quo pending determination of the dispute;

(b) Take action that would prevent, or refrain from taking action that is likely to cause, (i)
current or imminent harm or (ii) prejudice to the arbitral process itself;

(c) Provide a means of preserving assets out of which a subsequent award may be satis-
fied; or

(d) Preserve evidence that may be relevant and material to the resolution of the dispute.

56 ‘2. An interim measure is any temporary measure by which, at any time prior to the issu-
ance of the award by which the dispute is finally decided, the arbitral tribunal orders a
party, for example and without limitation, to: [...]’ [italics added, A/N].

57 Robert Volterra, ‘Provisional Measures (Interim Measures) and Investment Treaty Arbi-
tration under IcsID and UNCITRAL: Developments and Trends’ in Andrea Bjorklund,
lan Laird and Sergey Ripinsky (eds), Investment Treaty Law. Current Issues 111 (London
2009) 23 f.

58 See David Caron and Lee Caplan, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. A Commentary (2nd
edition, Oxford, OUP 2013) 524.

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
42 LENCI

element would run contrary to the typical provisional and modifiable charac-
ter of interim measures, able to lead to some confusion in connection with Art.
26, para. 5.°9 According to Prof. Caron and Mr. Caplan, such a view is ‘overly
formalistic, since there is no discussion on the fact that interim measures can
be granted in the form of an award.®°

In some cases, the text of the applicable treaty can shed some light on the
point of the binding force: it constitutes one of the manifestations of the phe-
nomenon called treatification of provisional measures, where the treaty plays
the role of lex specialis in relation to the relevant arbitration rules (mainly,
ICSID and UNCITRAL); said phenomenon will arguably become increasingly
relevant in future treaty negotiations and, consequently, arbitrations. An
example in this sense has been given by the EnCana Corp. v. Government of
Ecuador case.®* Claimant sought interim measures to prevent freezing of assets
of EnCana subsidiaries and its legal representative pending arbitration. Two
different provisions dealt with interim measures: the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules (in particular, the 1976 version) and Art. x111(8) of the applicable BIT,
namely the one between Canada and Ecuador. Art. x111(8) provides:

A tribunal may order an interim measure of protection to preserve the
rights of a disputing party, or to ensure that the tribunal's jurisdiction is
made fully effective, including an order to preserve evidence in the pos-
session or control of a disputing party or to protect the tribunal’s jurisdic-
tion. A tribunal may not order attachment or enjoin the application of
the measure alleged to constitute a breach of this Agreement. For pur-
poses of this paragraph, an order includes a recommendation.

The arbitral tribunal found that, since the treaty provision was specifically ap-
plicable to investments by Canadian corporations in Ecuador (and vice ver-
sa), it prevailed over the general power contained in Art. 26 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules.®? The clear meaning of the BIT provision indicated that it
had the authority to issue binding interim measures.

59 Art. 26, para. 5, reads: ‘The arbitral tribunal may modify, suspend or terminate an interim
measure it has granted, upon application of any party or, in exceptional circumstances
and upon prior notice to the parties, on the arbitral tribunal's own initiative’ See UNCIT-
RAL, 47th Session, UN Doc. A/CN.9/614, no. 2, 11, para. 51.

60 _ David Caron and Lee Caplan, quoted supra footnote 58, 525.

61 EnCana Corp. v. Government of Ecuador, Interim award dated 31 January 2004, LCIA ad-
ministered, UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

62 Award, para. 10.

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
THE LEGAL FORCE OF PROVISIONAL MEASURES 43

In Chevron Corp. v. Republic of Ecuador, the arbitral tribunal, after denying a
different degree of normativity of its decision according to the form adopted,®
declared that ‘this order shall be immediately final and binding upon all Par-
ties, subject only to any subsequent variation made by the Tribunal (upon ei-
ther its own initiative or any Party’s request).’64

The practice of the Iran-us Claims Tribunal has confirmed the binding pow-
er of interim measures under the UNCITRAL Rules, generally relying upon the
theory of inherent powers:® the theory plays the dual role of establishing ju-
risdiction to issue such measures and at the same time affirming binding force.
In Rockwell v. Iran, the arbitral tribunal extended the scope of the precedent
E-Systems v. Iran®® — which had affirmed the theory for the first time in the case
law of this tribunal — stating that this inherent power is in no way restricted
by the terms of Art. 26 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.®’ Such practice is
consolidated in the Iran-us Claims Tribunal.®*

63 Chevron Corp. v. Republic of Ecuador, Order for interim measures dated 9 February 2011,
PCA administered, 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Us-Ecuador BIT, lett. (C): ‘As to
form, the Tribunal records that, whilst this decision under Article 26 of the UNCITRAL
Rules is made in the form of an order and not an interim award, given the urgency re-
quired for such decision, the Tribunal may decide (upon its own initiative or any Par-
ty’s request) to confirm such order at a later date in the form of an interim award under
Articles 26 and 32 of the UNCITRAL Rules, without the Tribunal hereby intending conclu-
sively to determine the status of this decision, one way or the other, as an award under the
1958 New York Convention.

64 _ Ibid., lett. (1).

65 Andrea Carlevaris, La tutela cautelare nellarbitrato internazionale (Padova 2006) 237:
‘Per evitare le difficolta derivanti dall’esatta determinazione dei propri poteri sulla base
dell’art. 26, il Tribunale non si é generalmente limitato a giustificare la propria compe-
tenza in materia cautelare con riferimento alla norma in esame, e ha frequentemente
fatto ricorso ad argomenti diversi, primo tra i quali — come gia altrove osservato — quello
fondato sulla nozione di “inherent powers.”

66  ~E-Systems, Inc. v. The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, case no. 388, Award no.
ITM 13-388-FT. This case, as well as the following ones concerning the activity of the
Iran-us Claims tribunal, are drawn and re-elaborated starting from extracts contained in
David Caron and Lee Caplan, quoted supra footnote 58, 533 ff.

67 Rockwell Intl Systems, Inc. v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, Ministry of Defence, Award no.
ITM 20 dated 6 June 1983, 430 f., reprinted in 2 Iran-US CTR 369, 371.

68 See also RcA Global Communications, Inc. v. Islamic Republic of Iran, Award no. ITM 30-
160-1 dated 31 October 1983, 5, reprinted in 4 lran-us CTR 9, u.f.; Islamic Republic of Iran v.
United States of America, cases nos. A/4 and A/15, Award no. ITL 33-A-4/A-15(I11)-2 dated
1 February 1984, 5, reprinted in 5 lran-US CTR 131-133 (1984-1).

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
44 LENCI
4 Conclusion

General principles of law fulfil an important function in increasing the overall
legitimacy of investor-State arbitration, in the form of control on arbitral rule-
making power.

Their role may be considered from the negative perspective, meaning that
the evolution and/or consolidation of arbitral case law may be subject to a
scrutiny of non-incompatibility with the principles which are the expression
of the main legal systems of the world.

With regard to the legal force of provisional measures issued by ICsID tri-
bunals, despite the departure in ICsSID case law from the ordinary meaning
of Art. 47 of the 1csID Convention providing for the tribunal’s power to issue
merely hortatory provisional measures, such departure is legitimised by Ics1D
member States’ acquiescence thereto amounting to an informal modification
of the treaty®® and by the fact that it is not incompatible with the principles
which are the expression of the main legal systems of the world.

The evolution in ICcsID arbitration’s case law towards the binding force of
provisional measures is an example of the function as a ‘gate-keeper’ fulfilled
by the general principles of law in the investment framework.

69 — Tarcisio Gazzini and Robert Kolb, quoted supra footnote 36, 180-183.

Federico Lenci - 9789004368385
Downloaded from Brill.com1 0/09/2020 03:27:55PM
via Leiden University
