Arbitration International, 2015S, 31, 393-412
doi: 10.1093 /arbint/aiv023

Advance Access Publication Date: 8 May 2015
Article

ICSID provisional measures ‘in the round’

Sam Luttrell*

ABSTRACT

Provisional measures are an increasingly important device in international arbitration,
particularly where the stakes are high and the proceedings inevitably long. But, for the
most part, the conditions that must be satisfied before they will be granted remain a
matter for the parties to argue, and the tribunal to determine. This is especially so in
the case of proceedings at the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID), where the relevant posited law is open textured and the tribunal’s
discretion is broad. This makes the task of advising on, preparing and responding to
provisional measures requests more difficult. Based on published decisions, this article
seeks to provide a practical explanation of the five requirements that are most often ap-
plied by ICSID tribunals to decide requests for provisional measures. The conclusion
reached is that, although urgency and necessity are probably the most important fac-
tors, few arbitrators follow a ‘checklist’ approach. Instead, most arbitrators evaluate all
five of the main conditions ‘in the round’, meaning they assess the strengths and weak-
nesses of the request overall, guided by their own preferences and experiences.

KEY REFERENCES

e (ICSID) Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States (1965), art 47

e ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (2006), Rule 39

e Caratube International Oil Company LLP v Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/12, Decision Regarding Claimant’s Application for Provisional Measures
(2009)

e Victor Pey Casado v Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on
Provisional Measures (2001)

e RSM Production Corporation v Saint Lucia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10, Decision
on Saint Lucia’s request for security costs, IIC 655 (2014)

e Tethyan Copper Company Pty Limited v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No
ARB/12/1, Decision on Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures (2012)

e Plama Consortium Ltd v Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Order of
the Tribunal on the Claimant’s Request for Urgent Provisional Measures, IIC 190
(2005)

e Churchill Mining plc v Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No ARB/12/14, Procedural
Order 3 (Provisional Measures) (2013)

* Sam Luttrell, LLB/BA (Hons), UWA, PhD, counsel, International Arbitration Group, Clifford Chance,
Perth, Murdoch. Email: Sam.Luttrell@CliffordChance.com.

© The Author 2015S. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the London Court of International Arbitration.
All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com

+ 393

6107 Ye ZO UO Jasn OWN / Ajissenlun Uapley Aq LgzEgz/e6e/e/LENoesSqe-a[olWe/uoNeu}ique/Woo'dno‘slwepese//:sdyy Woy papeojumoq
394 0 ICSID provisional measures

® Perenco Ecuador Ltd v Republic of Ecuador & Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador,
ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Request for Provisional Measures (2009)

@ Bernhard von Pecold and ors v Zimbabwe, CSTD Case Nos. ARB/16/15, ARB/1G/
25, Directions concerning claimants’ application for provisional measures, HC $49
(2012)

® Quiborax SA and ors v Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional
Measures, HC 422 (2010)

"The magnitude and complexity of most international disputes, involving ines-
capably long periods of time before any decision or amicable settlement can be
reached, give the question of provisional measures considerable significance.
This significance appears to be increasing.

Pierre Lalive (1981).’

iL INTRODUCTION

The trend that Professor Lalive observed over 30 years ago continues today. The sig-
nificance of provisional measures to the practice of international arbitration, both in
its coramercial and treaty-based forms, is increasing. There would seem to be a nurn-
ber of reasons for this: growing confidence in the enforceability of arbitral awards
(and the arbitral procedure as a whole}, the ongoing process of specialization and
competition in the market for international arbitration services (provisional measures
being one of the ways value can be added early}, and changes in the main rules and
laws of arbitration Ginchuding the advent of the ‘emergency arbitrator’ in certain insti-
tutional systems). But while in the commercial realrn the rules for the granting of
provisional measures (or interixn measures, as they are also known) are becoming
more clear, they remain somewhat less certain in the ‘hybrid’ domain of investrnent
treaty arbitration. This is especially so in the case of proceedings at the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), the forum with which this
article is concerned.

The purpose of this article is to offer a summary of the principles and require-
ments that are, at present, most likely to be applied by an ICSID tribunal to decide a
request for provisional measures, and which together constitute what is sometimes
(fairly to some, daringly to others) referred to as the “ICSID test’. To that end, this
article begins by setting out the posited law, which is Article 47 of the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between states and nationals of other
states (ICSID Convention).” After a short summary of the procedure for provisional
measures in HCSED arbitration, the focus shifts to the jurisprudence. This section is
broken up into five sub-headings, each of which corresponds to an element of the
test most commonly applied by ICSID tribunals. Authorities—accepted and

kL This quote is taken from Professor Lalive’s paper, “The First ‘World Bank’ Arbitration (Holiday inns v
Morocco} - Some Legal Problems’ (1980) 51 BY IL 123, 132-133. The second sentence was originally in-
cluded as a footnote.

2 ICSED Convention, Washington, 18 March 19685.

ICSID provisional measures « 398

anomalous; new and old

are cited and discussed throughout, but to be clear, the
cases referred to in this article by no means represent the complete universe of
authority.

In the conchision that follows, the observation is made that while urgency and ne-
cessity are probably the most important considerations, few arbitrators follow a
‘checklist’ approach when they decide a request for provisional measures. Instead,
the prevailing practice is for the tribunal to evahuate all five of the main conditions ‘in
the round’—reaning the strengths and weaknesses of the request are assessed holis-
tically, with the attention and weight given to each condition depending on the facts
of the case, the backgrounds, and experiences of the arbitrators themselves and, in-
creasingly, the nature of the orders being sought.

2, FIRST PRINCIPLES
ICSD arbitration takes place under the ICSID Convention. It is trite but worth
stressing that the ‘seat’ of an ICSID tribunal is the ICSID Convention itseli—no na-
tional lex arbitri is involved. Unless otherwise agreed, arbitral proceedings at ICSED
are conducted in accordance with the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings 2006 (ICSID Rules).
Article 47 of the ICSID Convention provides:

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the
circurnstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which should
be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party.

In effect, Article 47 is the primary source of substantive law for provisional mea-
sures, and Rule 39 of the ICSID Rules sets out the procedure,

Although Article 47 uses the word ‘recommend’, it is now well settled that [CSD
tribunals have the power to order provisional measures, and that sach orders are le-
gally binding.’ While provisional measures orders do not benefit from the favourable
enforcement provisions of the ICSID Convention, in the majority of cases, the en-
joined party complies voluntarily, if only to avoid alienating the arbitrators who ulti-
mately decide the merits of the case (a structural aspect of arbitration that
distinguishes it from litigation, in which the interlocutory and trial phases are often
handled by different judges). In practice, when a party disobeys provisional

3 See Emilio Agustin Maffezini v Kingdom of Spain (ECSID Case No ARB/97/7), Decision on Request for
Provisional Measures, 28 Crctober 1999, para 10; Tokios Tokelés » Ukraine (ICSID) Case No ARB/02/18),
Ord 1, 1 uby 2003, para 6; and Occidental Petroleum Corp. and Exploration and Production Co. v Republic of
Ecuador (CSID Case No ABB/06/11), Decision on Provisional Measures, 17 August 2007, para 96.
Despite this well-developed tine of authority, some arbitrators remain agnostic on this point. See, for exam-
ple, Millicom International Operations B.V. & Sentel GSM S.A. v Republic of Senegal (ECSED Case No ARB/
68/20), Decision on the Application for provisional measures submitted by the Claimants on 24 August
2009, 9 December 2009, para 49. The most recent example of resistance to the idea that art 47 gives the
tribunal the power to order provisional measures can be found in RSM Production Corporation v St Lucia,
where (in his dissenting opinion on security for costs} Judge Nottingham said ‘in|o matter how many times
it is repeated, an order is not a recommendation. Only in the jurisprudence of an imaginary Wonderland wouid
this make sense. See RSM (n 21), Dissenting Opinion of Edward Nottingham, 12 August 2014, para 16.

396 0 ICSID provisional measures

measures, this disobedience can be taken inte account in the final award and, de-
pending on the consequences of the disobedience, may sound in damages.

A request for provisional measures can be made at any time after the arbitration is
instituted,” and once such a request is made, the tribunal must give at least the
responding party the right to present its observations.” Although the term ‘observa-
tions’ implies a certain collegiate informality, the reality is that provisional measures
applications are often more like hard-fought mini-trials, with detailed legal pleadings
and supporting evidence (including witness statements}. In practice, the sequence
comprises two, and often three, steps: the request (in the form of an application),
the responding party's observations (in the form of a reply}, and (somewhat less fre-
quently} the applicant’s rejoinder. More often than not, a hearing will be held.

Requests for provisional measures in ICSE proceedings tend to be adjudicated
reasonably quickly, with most tribunals rendering a decision within two to four
months after a request is filed.° Until recently, dissents were quite rare, but it may be
that this is changing. In terms of form, the current trend seems to be to issue the rec-
ommendation as a ‘Decision’, although simple procedural orders are also widely
used; perhaps surprisingly, the title ‘Recommendation’ is almost never used.” The is-
sue of form is not as benign as it may seem at first blush. For exarnple, when (as is
quite often done} the tribunal issues a ‘holding request’ to the parties to maintain
the status quo and not aggravate the dispute pending determination of a party’s
request for provisional measures, and the other party takes contrary action, the ques-
tion arises as to whether such a request has the force of a recommendation for the
purposes of Article 47, While there are certainly arguments both ways, in at least one
case it has been held that such a request does have the force of a recommendation.®

As a final procedural point, it is worth noting that the [CSED systern rnakes no al-
lowance for provisional measures to be granted before the arbitral tribunal is consti-
tuted.” The Secretary-General of ICSEID can, however, set a briefing schedule
pending the constitution of the arbitral tribunal so that the request for provisional
measures can be heard immediately thereafter. At the other end of the proceedings,

4 Under r 6{2} of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration
Proceedings, the arbitration is deemed to be instituted on the date of registration of the Request for
Arbitration.

§ This duty arises under x 39(4) of the ICSLD Rules. Failure to afford the parties the right to make their ob-
servations may expose the final award to annulment under art S2(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.

6 See L Malintoppi, “Provisional Measures in. Recent ICSID Proceedings: What Parties Request and What
Tribunals Order’, in C Binder and others (eds), International Investment Law for the 21° Century — Essays in
Honour of Christoph Schreuer (OUP, Oxford 2009)182-84, table 11.1 showing the delays between requests
for provisional measures and decisions in [CSTD cases.

7 The only publically available example of the term ‘Recommendation’ being used comes from Saipem SpA.
v People’s Republic of Bangladesh (ICSEID Case No ARB/05/07), where the tribunal’s conclusions on the
claimant’s request for provisional measures were communicated in the form of a ‘Decision on Jurisdiction
and Recommendation on Provisional Measures’.

8 Perenco Beuador Ltd. v Republic of Ecuador & Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador (CSTD Case No ARB/
08/6), Decision on Request for Provisional Measures, 8 May 2009, para 76 (“The Tribunal cannot accept
that 3 request, formally expressed, may properly be regarded as of less binding force than a
recommendation’).

9 Under + 6(1) of the TCSID Rules, the tribunal is deemed to be constituted on the date that the Secretary
General notifies the parties that all of the arbitrators have accepted their appointment.

ICSID provisional measures « 397

it remains an open question—and indeed a question for another day—whether an ad
, - 0
hoc annulment coramittee has the power to grant provisional measures of protection.

3. SECONDARY ELEMENTS

Neither the ICSID Convention nor the [CSID Rules specify the requirements that
must be satistied for provisional measures to be granted. We raust, therefore, look at
the practice of other ICSD tribunals and broader principles of international law to
ascertain the rules that are most likely to be applied to determine a request for provi-
sional measures. |

The key point here is practice: parties requesting provisional measures, and parties
opposing thera, need to understand that ICSED arbitration takes place on a complex
international legal plane, and the grounds on which the request will be decided vary
from tribunal to tribunal. In this setting, it is important to have a sense of both the
past and the present. Applicants and respondents alike should look to the practice of
international tribunals (and scholarly opinions} generally, and the records of their ar-
bitrators specifically. As to the latter, while it is never possible to predict exactly how
the arbitrators will (individually or collectively) evaluate the merits of the request, it
is often possible to glean their preferences from their previous published decisions
and, occasionally, papers and books they have written.

Despite some conflicting decisions and scholarly views, it is apparent that the ra-
jority of ICSID arbitrators and cornmentators accept that some or all of the following
five requirements must be satisfied:

i. the arbitral tribunal must have prima facie jurisdiction;
ii. there must be a prima facie basis to the claim;
iti. the requested measures must be necessary to protect the applicant's rights
(or to preserve the status quo and avoid aggravating the dispute)’’;
iv. the requested measures must be urgent; and
v. the requested measures must be proportional.**

10 To the best of the writer's knowledge, this question has so far only come up in one case: Libananco
Holdings Co. Ltd. v Republic of Turkey (ECSID Case No ARB/06/8). There, the armulment committee de-
clined to rule on the issue of its competence because it found that the circumstances did not justify a rec-
ommendation of provisional measures. See Libananco, Decision on Apphicant’s Request for Provisional
Measures, 7 May 2012.

1k ‘This need to “find the rules’, and the uncertainty inherent in it, has long been identified as problematic.
Writing in 1986, Paul Friedland noted that, in contrast to 3 national court, an ICSID tribunal ‘seeking to
confirm its ruling te international law principles will likely find that the standard for determining the req-
uisite circumstances for, and the proper scope of, an award or recommendation of interim relief is ill-
defined’. See PD Friedland, ‘Provisional Measures and ICSID) Arbitration’ (1986) 2 Arb Int 335, 335; see
also (© Mouwad and EF Silbert, ‘A Guide to Interim Measures in Investor-State Arbitration’ (2013) 3 Arb
Int 3814,

12 The first limb of this requirement comes from r 39(1) of the ICSUD Rules, which requires the applicant
for provisional measures to specify the right in need of protection.

13 These requirements are informed by the jurisprudence of the international Court of Justice (IC}), which
ig relevant in the TCSID context because art 47 of the [CSID Convention was directly inspired by art 41
of the Statute of the IC] (‘The Court shall have the power to indicate, if it considers that circumstances
so require, any provisional measures which ought to be taken to preserve the respective rights of either
party’). See, for example, CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. and CEMEX Caracas If Investments B.V. v

398 ° ICSID provisional measures

lt bears repeating that there is ne doctrine of precedent in TCSID arbitration, and
each tribunal is free to apply those requirements that it considers appropriate.
However, as the tribunal in Caratube noted, the absence of stare decisis “does not pre-
clude the Tribunal from considering arbitral decisions and the arguments of the
Parties based upon them, to the extent that it may find that they throw any usefal
light on the issues that arise for decision in this case’.’*

Provisional measures are not easily obtained in ICSUD arbitration, and, as a general
cule, ‘the iraposition of provisional measures is an extraordinary measure which should
not be granted lightly by the Arbitral Tribunal’.’° An applicant for provisional measures
will, therefore, usually bear a heavy burden of proof (and persuasion) to show why
provisional measures should be granted. Although this burden is normally applied
globally (ie to the request as a whole}, some elements contain their own internal stan-
dard of proof (namely prima facie jurisdiction and prima facie claim on the merits), and
these requirements are, in their own terms, subject to a lower threshold as a result,

4, FURTHER DISCUSSION

4.1 The arbitral tribunal must have prima facie jurisdiction
The threshold to satisfy this requirement is low. The applicant for provisional mea-
sures does not need to establish jurisdiction in any definitive or final sense. Instead, a
tribunal must merely be satisfied that the facts alleged by the applicant appear, prima
facie, to afford a basis on which the jurisdiction of the tribunal might be founded.
Applicants with difficult jurisdictional cases often cite Pey Casade v Chile, where the
tribunal considered that what must be demonstrated tor purposes of a request for
provisional measures is ‘the prima facie existence of jurisdiction, or, to couch this in
: c SC ee 917 : fe
negative terms, the absence of a clear lack of jurisdiction’ ° Where the tribunal finds
that prima facie jarisdiction is satisfied, it can reverse that finding later in the proceed-
ings, as it is well settled that no res judicata attaches to a finding of primi facie juris-
diction at the provisional measures stage.”
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (1CSID Case No ARB/08/15S), Decision on the Claimants’ Request for
Provisional Measures, 3 March 2010, para 39 (citing Victor Pey Casado v Republic of Chile (ICSID Case
No ARB/98/2), Decision on Provisional Measures, 25 September 2001, para 2; see also B Love,
‘Introductory Note te ICSI: Case CEMEX Caracas Inv. B.V. and CEMEX Caracas I] Inv. BV. v Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela’ (2010) 49 ILM 1195, L198; and C Schreuer and others, The ICSID Convention: A
Commentary (2nd eda, CUP, Cambridge, 2009) 759. As is observed throughout this article, some of these
requirements-——particularly urgency-—are also informed by international commercial arbitration law and
practice.
14 Caratube International Oil Company LLP v Republic of Kazakhstan (CSTD Case No ARB/08/12)},
Decision Regarding Claimant’s Application for Provisional Measures, 31 July 2009, pars 73.
Maffezini (1 3) para 10; see also Plama Consortium Ltd. v Republic of Bulgaria (CSTD Case No ARB/03/
24) Order of 6 September 2005, para 38; Phoenix Action Ltd. v Czech Republic (CSID Case No ARB/
06/5), Decision on Provisional Measures, 6 April 2007, para 33; CEMEX {n 13) para 41.

i
GR

16 This formulation prevails in IC] jurisprudence. See, for example, Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay
(Argentina v Uruguay), Provisional Measures, Order of 23 January 2007, FC} Reports 2007, 40.

17 Pey Casade (n 13} 379.

18 The Anglo-franian Oil case provides a useful illustration of such a reversal. There, the ICTs finding of
prima facie jurisdiction at the interim measures stage was ultimately overturned at the jurisdictional stage
proper. See Anglo-ranian Oil Co. (United Kingdom v Iran}, interim Measures, Order of 5 July 1951, IC}
Reports 1951, 89.

19 Pey Casado (n 13} para 14; see also Millicom (n 3) para 38.

ICSID provisional measures + 399

Where the proceedings have been bifurcated (jurisdiction /merits), and the re-
quest for provisional measures is filed after a positive finding of jurisdiction has been
made by the tribunal, this element will obviously not be contentious. Similarly, where
the requesting party is the respondent state, prima facie jurisdiction may (at least in
part) be effectively conceded.” However, there is an argument that, where the state
is the party requesting provisional measures, it does not need to establish prima facie
jurisdiction because to do so the state would be required to ‘establish the negative
against its own interests’.”’ This was the view that Dr Gavan Griffith QC took (in his
separate assent) in RSM Production Corporation v St Lucia, where the state succeeded
in obtaining security for costs as a provisional measure.*

Even in the ‘classical’ scenario of a claimant seeking provisional measures early in the
proceedings, it is relatively rare for a tribunal to engage in involved discussion or analysis
of the prima facie jurisdiction element. There would seem to be a number of reasons for
this. Inherent ease of satisfaction, and the fact that only an ‘at first sight”? inquiry is re-
quired, may be the answer, as may the fact that the registration of the request for arbitra-
tion by TCSID is seen by some as providing a sufficient basis for a fading of prima facte
jurisdiction.”* Interaction with the element of urgency might also be a cause—if the mat-
ter is urgent, then, to some extent, the tribunal may give the applicant the ‘benefit of the
doubt”? on jurisdiction in the limited context of its provisional measures request.

That said, some arbitrators do pay close attention to the requirement that prima
facie parisdiction be established. Background may play a role here. For example, arbi-
trators from Germany, where the requirement to show a prima facie case (as a whole,
meaning both on jarisdiction and the merits) is given significant weight in adminis-
trative proceedings, may place more importance on this element than arbitrators
from other jurisdictions.° The decision on provisional measures in Tethyan

20 See, for example, Churchill Mining ple v Republic of Indonesia ACSTID Case No ARB/12/14), Procedural
Ord 4 (Provisional Measures), 4 March 2013, para 38, where the tribunal held that ‘[i}n light of the fact
that it is the Respondent who presented the Request [for provisional measures} and that the Respandent
argues therein that it has a right to seek an orderly resolution of the dispute in the framework of this arbi-
wation ... for present purposes it has prima facie jurisdiction ratione materiae,”

21 RSM Production Corporation v Saint Lucia (CSTD Case No ARB/12/10), Assenting Reasons of Gavan
Griffith, para S.

22 ibid.

23 Millicom, (n 3) paza 42.

24 See, for example, GR Delaume, TCSID Tribunals and Provisional Measures — A Review of the Cases’
(1986) 1 FCSID Rev-FIL] 392, 393; PD Friedland, ‘Provisional Measures and ICSED Arbitration’ (1986)
2 Arb Int 335, 344; Schreuer (n 13) 772. There is, however, a significant body of authority for the propo-
sition that the registration of the Request for Arbitration does not, without more, aftord a sufficient basis
for a finding of prima facie jurisdiction. See, for example, Pey Casado (n 13) para 11; Millicom (n 3} para
43; see also Perenco (n 8) para 39, where the tribunal held that ‘li]t is not enough for the Tribunal that
the Secretary-General bas found that the dispute is not manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Centre
and has therefore registered the Request for Arbitration ...’

ed
w

The idea that the “benefit of the doubt’ should be given to the existence of jurisdiction is often traced
back te the concurrent opinion of Judge Holtzimann in the Tran—-United States Claims Tribunal case
Bendone-Derossi International v Isamic Republic of fran (Case No 375, Interim Award No ITM 40-371-1,
7 June 1984; reprinted in 6 IRAN-US CTR 130).

26 The writer is grateful to Dr Gebhard Buecheler for his views on this point. Naturally, any overreach is for
the writer's account.

409 > ICSID provisional measures

Copper,’ made by an ICSID tribunal chaired by German arbitrator Dr Klaus Sachs,
could be taken as an illustration of this phenomenon.”

4.2 There must be a prima facie basis to the claim
The threshold to satisfy this requirement is similarly low, and is more often than not
uncontroversial. The tribunal cannot require ‘actual proof””; rather, it need only be
satisfied fumus bonus juris that, if the facts alleged are proven, it could be led to issue
an award in favour of the applicant; or, alternatively, that the claim is not frivolous or
vexatious.

The question as to whether the applicant has a prima facie case on the merits is some-
tirnes linked with the assessment of the rights in need of protection.” This is logical be-
cause, for Article 47 of the ICSID Convention to be brought into operation, there must
first be at least an arguable case for the existence of the right the subject of the request.
lt is tor this reason that there is sorne overlap between this element and necessity.

At this stage (and in the provisional measures phase generally}, the tribunal will
need to be careful not to give the appearance that it has prejadged the merits of the
dispute. The risk of prejudgment is often raised by respondents. The argument is typi-
cally made in one of two ways: first, that in seeking provisional measures, the applicant
is effectively asking for the same thing it wants from the final award (the so-called
‘backdoor to the merits’ argument); secondly, that in applying for provisional mea-
sures, the applicant is front-loading the proceedings, in the hope that the picture of dis-
tress it paints in its early application for provisional measures will form a lasting
impression on the tribunal (and thereby subconsciously predispose it on the merits).

One way arbitrators address these concerns (which will be perfectly legitimate in
some cases) is to treat the application for provisional measures as a proceeding in its
own right. On this view, if the measures are granted, that says nothing final about
whether or not the respondent state did or did not have a right to do or not doa
thing at international law-—it says only that protection of the relevant interest is war-
ranted pending final resolution on the merits. That is not to say, however, that tribu-
nals can be cavalier in their approach to the risk of prejudgment: rightly or wrongly,
appearances are the touchstone here. Any recoramendation of provisional measures
should, therefore, be carefully worded to make it clear that the findings and recom-
mendations of the tribunal are made on an interim basis only.

Unless the respondent focuses on it (for example, by alleging that the underlying
claim is frivolous or has an improper collateral purpose), the requirement to show
a prima facie case on the merits will not normally be given much attention. However,
as has been noted above, the views of arbitrators can vary on this point, and applicants
and respondents alike should consider the backgrounds of their arbitrators when decid-
ing how much energy to devote to the establishment of a prima facie case.

27 Tethyan Copper Company Pty. Limited v Islamic Republic of Pakistan ((CSED Case No ARB/12/1),
Decision on Claimant's Request for Provisional Measures, 13 December 2012.

28 The Tethyan Copper decision pays what would seem to be more than the usual attention to the question
of whether the Claimant had established that the tribunal had prima facie jurisdiction. ibid paras 123-33.

29 Burlington Resources Inc. et al. v Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador (ICSID Case No
ARB/08/05), Procedural Ord 1 on Burlington Oriente’s Request for Provisional Measures, 29 June 2009, para $3.

30 For example, ibid paras $2-71.

ICSID provisional measures +» 404

4.3 The measure must be necessary to protect the applicant’s rights

As a threshold aspect of necessity, the requesting party must clearly define the rights
that it says are io need of protection. Often, this will be done as part of the moving
party's argument that it has a prima facie case on the merits. The rights that deserve
protection in the form of provisional measures do not extend to ail of the applicant's
rights—at the very least, the rights in question must bear a relation to the dispute as
defined by the claims and the relief sought.’ Indeed, some authorities (notably
Amco Asia’*} seem to go further and require that the relevant right forms the subject
matter of the dispute—a restrictive approach that is arguably inconsistent with what
the dratters of the ICSID Convention intended.

On any view, the class of rights eligible for protection under Article 47 of the
ICSID Convention is not limited to the substantive rights in dispute: the parties’ pro-

status quo’ and the non-aggravation of the dispute—can also be protected by provi-
sional measures.°° Other procedural rights, such as the preservation of the effective-
ness of a future award," the preservation of evidence,* and the exclusivity of ECSTD

3h See Plama (n 15) paras 40-41; see also Churchill Mining (n 20) para 48; and Quiborax SA, Non Metailic
Minerals SA. and Allan Fosk Kaphin v Plurinational State of Bolivia (CSID Case No ARB/06/2),
Decision on Provisional Measures, 26 February 2010, para 118.

32. Amco Asia Corporation et al. v Republic of indonesia (CSUD Case No ARB/81/1), Decision on Request
for Provisional Measures, 9 December 1983, extract published in 24 1LM 365 (1985). In this case, the tri-
bunal read art 47 of the ICISD Convention strictly, holding (411 of the published extract) that ‘the rights
to which this provision is relating are the rights in dispute...” See also Maffezini (m 3) para 10 (Any
preliminary measure to be ordered by an ICSED arbitral tribunal must relate to the subject matter of the
case before the tribunal and not to separate, unrelated issues or extraneous matters’). In this regard, it is
worth noting that art 17 of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL)
Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration (the UNCITRAL Model Law) contains similar
wording (order any party to take such interim measure of protection as the arbitral tribunal may consider
necessary in respect of the subject matter of the dispute’).

33 See PD Friedland, ‘Provisional Measures and 1CSTD Arbitration’ (1986) 2 Arb Int 335, 338, whe, in his
discussion of the Amco Asia decision, observes that the travaux préparatvires ta the ICSTD Convention
‘do not indicate that the drafters desired to impose tight restraints on the discretion of ICSD Tribunals to
award interim relief’.

34 Burlington (n 29) para 60; Quiborax (n 31) para 133.

35 Some tribunals have sought to define the scope of the status quo tight, and the circumstances in which its
protection will be necessary. For example, the tribunal in Plama (n 15) para 45, said that the sight to the
maintenance of the status quo as being triggered when ‘a change in circumstances threatens the ability of
the Arbitral Tribunal to grant the relief which a party seeks and the capability of giving effect to that
relief’.

36 See Amco Asia (n 32) 412; see also Bivater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID
Case No ARB/05/22), Frocedural Crd 1, 31 March 2006, para 71; Millicom (nm 3) para 45; and
Burlington (n 29) para 60, where the tribunal cited as authority, the decision of the IC] in Electricity
Company of Sofia and Bulgaria (Belgium v Bulgaria}, Request for the Indication of Interiza Measures of
Protection, Order of § December 1939, PCH, series A/B, No 79 (hereinafter ‘Electricity Company of
Sofia’), 199.

37 See, for example, Burlington (1 29), para 71.
38 See, for example, AGIP S.p.A. v People’s Republic of the Congo QCSID Case No ARB/77/1), 24 ILM 365

(1985). In this early case, the tribunal issued its recommendations on the preservation of certain items of
evidence in the form of a letter to the respondent state's government (dated 18 January 1979). On the
ability of the tribunal to grant provisional measures to compel the actual production of documents, see
Biwater Gauff (n 36) para 101 (Although there may be instances in which document production could

402» ICSID provisional measures

arbitration under Article 26 of the ICSED Convention,” are also amenable to interim
protection (either individually or under the rubric of ‘procedural integrity’). in doc
trinal terms, what seems to set ‘procedural integrity’ measures apart from the wider
class of orders available under Article 47 is that, where the procedural integrity of the
arbitration is seriously threatened, there will be an argument that the harm is neces-
sarily irreparable (and the need for provisional measures self-evident), For scholars
aod practitioners, this is an interesting area, not least of all because the unique treat-
ment of harm and necessity in ‘procedural integrity’ applications has, it seems, en-
abled the development of a new notion of urgency, being urgency that is axiomatic.

As a final preliminary point of classification, it is important to note that the pre-
sent tense of Rule 39(1) (provisional measures for the preservation of its rights’)
has been read as excluding from protection rights that are ‘hypothetical’ or ‘to be cre-
ated in future’.*! This construction was, however, challenged recently in RSM. There
the claimant opposed the state’s application for security for costs on the basis Ginter
alia) that the xight was purely hypothetical and, therefore, mot a ‘right to be pre-
served’ for the purposes of Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. In his dissenting rea-
sons, Judge Nottingham agreed, reasoning (along the lines of Maffezini) that the
drafters’ careful use of the word ‘preserve’ showed that the right must presently exist
and cannot be contingent or hypothetical.” However, the majority of the tribunal
(Dr Griffith and Prof Dr Siegfried Elsing) rejected this argument, instead character-
izing the state’s right as a procedural right to claim costs which could be protected as
a measure necessary to ensure the ‘integrity of the proceedings as a whole’.”*

While necessity is often relatively straightforward when the request for provisional
measures is made by the claimant, the situation becomes less clear when the respondent
is the moving party. This is because the scope of rights amenable to protection is some-
what narrower for respondents than it is for claimants. Where the claimant's request can
extend to both rights relating to the dispute as defined by its claim and its procedural
rights in the arbitration, the respondent can usually only request provisional measures in
respect of the latter category (ie procedural rights)."' According to the tribunal in Plama:

[t]he rights to be preserved by provisional measures are circumscribed by the
requesting party's claims and requests for relief. They may be general rights,

be ordered pursuant to Article 47 [of the ICSID Convention}, this would in the Arbitral Tribunal’s view
be exceptional’).

39 See, tor example, Plama (n 15) para 38; Tokios Tokelés (a 3) Ord 3 of 18 January 2005, para 7; Burlington
{5 29) para 37; Quiboraw (1 31) para 127.

40 See, for example, Quiborax (1 31) para 148.

41 Maffezini (n 3) para 13. There, the tribunal dismissed a request for provisional measures to order the
clairnant to post a bond to cover the respondent’s anticipated costs of detence.

42 RSM (m 21), Dissenting Opinion of Edward Nottingham, para 8 (8 (‘the provisional measures envisaged
in Article 47 are mainly those formulated to preserve the status quo pende lite’).

43 RSM (n 22), Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security of Costs, 14 August 2014, para 69.

44 The scope of the respondent state’s rights amenable to protection by provisional measures might be
broadez, if it has advanced a counterclaim, and this has been admitted as part of the dispute. While coun-
terclaims are relatively rare in ICSID arbitration, they are sometimes made. See, for example, Alex Genin,
Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v Republic of Estonia (CSTD Case No ARB/99/2), Gustav F.
W. Hamester GmbH & Co. KG v Republic of Ghana (ICSID Case No ARB/07/24); and Spyridon Roussalis
v Romania (CSTD Case No ARB/G6/1).

ICSID provisional measures « 403

such as the rights to due process or the right not to have the dispute aggra-
vated, but those general rights must be related to the specific disputes in arbitration,
which, in turn, are defined by the Claimant’s claims and requests for relief to date.”

More recently, in Churchill Mining, the tribunal rejected the respondent's request
ort a similar basis. There, much like it did in Amico Asia, Indonesia sought provisional
measures to restrain the claimant from making what it said were false and harmful
public staternents about the case (and the investment climate in Indonesia gener-
ally).*° In the tribunal’s understanding, the rights that Indonesia sought to protect in
its request were ‘the right to attract foreign investment, the right to regulate and pro-
mote foreign investment in its natural resources, the right to enforce regulations on
investments in its natural resources, the right to the protection of its honour and rep-
utation, and the right to justice based on factual trath'.*” The tribunal held that these

were ‘not rights in dispute that could warrant the recommendation of provisional

9 48
Measaures .

Regardless of which party makes the request, the preservation of the status quo
and non-aggravation of the dispute are generally accepted as important consider-
ations in examining provisional measures requests in international disputes.” The
applicant will also have to show that the requested measure is necessary to achieve
these purposes, or, put in the words of the ICSID Convention, why the ‘circum-
stances so require’

Many ICSID tribunals (notably the tribunal in Occidental?') have taken the view
that the element of necessity entails (or implies’*) consideration of whether the
actions in question will cause ‘irreparable harm’, an approach that is consistent with
IC] authority.°° If the tribunal applies the ‘irreparable harm’ standard, it will likely

4§  Plama (n 15) para 40.

46 Churchill Mining (a 20) para 1. Indonesia also sought (and was refused) provisional measures to restrain
the claimant from approaching Indonesian government officials to persuade them to settle the dispute.

47 ibid para $0.

48 ibid.

49 See Electricity Company of Sofia (n 36) 199; see also LaGrand Case (Germany v United States of America)
Judgment of 27 June 2001, IC] Reports 2001, 466, para 103. The travaux préparatoires to the ICSID
Convention referred to the need ‘to preserve the status quo between the parties pending a final decision
on the merits’. See Schreuer (n 13) 778-80, 793-95. Note A to x 39 of the ICSTD Rules complements
this statement by explaining that art 47 of the Convention ‘is based on the principle that once a dispute is
submitted to arbitration the parties should not take steps that might aggravate or extend their dispute ox
prejudice the execution of the award’, See 1 ICSID Reports 99.

50 Indeed, some arbitrators take the view that, where the status quo needs to be preserved, this alone will
hustify a grant of provisional measures, See, for example, Perence (n 8) para 28, where the tribunal issued
a preliminary ‘request’ (ater held to have the force of an art 47 recommendation proper) to preserve the
status quo pending determination of the claimant's request for provisional measures.

$1 Occidental (n 3) para 59 (iT the circurnstances under which provisional measures are required under
Article 47 of the ICSID Convention are those in which the meastires are necessary to preserve a party's
right and where the need is urgent in order to avoid irreparable harm.’}; see also Tokios Tokelés (n 3},
Procedural Ord 3, para 8; Plana Gi 15) para 46; Phoenix Action (n 1S) para 38; CEMEX (n 13) para 44;
Quiborac (1 31) parva 156. See also Schrener (9 13) 776.

52 Quiborax (n 31) para 123 (‘the last requirement [ie. necessity} implying an assessment of the risk of
harm to be avoided by the measures’).

$3 The Occidental tribunal was following the decision of the IC] in Pulp Mills (n 16) (see 11, para 31-32).
See also Passage through the Great Belt (Finland v Denmark), Provisional Measures, Order of 29 Fuly 1991,

404° ICSID provisional measures

focus on the sufficiency of monetary damages as a remedy, especially if damages are
the only remedy that the claimant seeks.°* The main exception to the ‘sufficiency of
monetary damages’ rule seems to be the destruction of the investment: where the
actions in question would, if not restrained by provisional measures, effectively bring
an end to the investor's business, then the harm feared may well be ‘irreparable’ not-
withstanding the fact that the loss could (at least in theory) be measured in
money.

However, several ICSID tribunals have questioned the application of the ‘irrepara-
ble harm’ standard. For example, in Perenco, the tribunal concluded that Article 47 of
the [CSTD Convention “does not lay down a test of irreparable loss and the authori-
ties do not warrant so narrow a construction’.° Looking at the case law, it is appar-
ent that arbitrators who reject the ‘irreparable harm’ standard tend to prefer a
formulation of either ‘substantial prejudice’ or ‘significant’ harm,*’ both of which im-
pose lower thresholds. Similar approaches have been taken by tribunals constitated
in investor-state arbitrations under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.”
Commenting on provisional measures in that system, Klaus-Peter Berger said that:

[t]o preserve the legitimate rights of the requesting party, the measures must
be ‘necessary’. This requirement is satisfied if the delay in the adjudication of
the main claim caused by the arbitral proceedings would lead to a ‘substantial
(but not necessarily ‘irreparable’ as known in common law doctrine) prejudice
for the requesting party.”

Whether the ‘irreparable harm’ standard is applicable, and if so how it is applied in
practice, seems to vary depending on the purpose of the provisional measures

{C} Reports 1991, 18, para 89; Certain Criminal Proceedings in France (Republic of the Congo v France},
Order of 17 June 2003, LC} Reports 2003, 107, para 22.

34 See, for example, Plama (n 18) para 46 (The Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s argument that harm is
not ixreparable if it can be compensated for by damages, which is the case in the present arbitration and
which, moreover, is the only remedy the Claimant seeks’).

Wa
wa

See, for example, Perenco (n 8) para 46, where the tribunal held that ‘Li]f Perenco’s business in Ecuador
were effectively brought to an end in this way [by seizure of its assets}, such injury could not, in the
Tribunal’s judgment, be adequately compensated by an award of damages should its claim ultimately be
upheld. See also CEMEX, (n 13) para S, where the tribunal distinguished between (i) cases in which
compensation provides a sufficient remedy for an alleged prejudice; and (ii) others in which ‘there is a se-
tious tisk of destruction of a going concer that constitutes an investment’.

56 Perenco, ibid para 43.

57 See, for example, City Oriente Lid. v Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No ARB/06/21}, Decision on
Revocation of Provisional Measures and Other Procedural Matters, 13 May 2008, para 72, where the tri-
bunal cast doubt on the requirement of ‘irreparable harm’, instead preferring to impose a requirement
that the ‘harm spared to the petitioner by such measures must be significant and that it exceed greatly the
daraage caused to the party affected thereby’. This is, im effect, the ‘balance of convenience’ test that is
widely applied in international commercial arbitration. See also Burlington (n 29) para 82, where the tri-

bunal expressed the standard as one of ‘harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages’.

wr
res]

See, for example, Chevron Corp. and Texaco Petroleum Co. v Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL Rules,
Permanent Court of Arbitration Case No 2009-23, Second Interim Award on Interim Measures, 16
February 2012, para 3 (‘a risk that substantial harm may befall the Claimants before this Tribunal can de-
cide the Parties’ dispute by any final award’, emphasis added).

59 See K-P Berger, International Economic Arbitration in Studies in Transnational Economic Law, vol 9,
(Khawer, The Hague, 1993) 336, emphasis added.

ICSID provisional measures « 408

sought. For example, it is arguable that measures directed at preserving the proce-
dural integrity of the arbitration automatically satisfy this standard, as harm to a
party’s procedural rights (especially with respect to access to evidence} cannot be

60

remedied by an award of damages.” It may also be possible to argue that because
the purpose of the provisional measures is to preserve the status quo and prevent ag-
gravation of the dispute, the tribunal need not consider the question of harm (at least
not in the context of necessity).°' There is, however, a line of IC} authority to sup-
port the argument that even where the provisional measures in question are directed
at preventing aggravation of the dispute, ‘irreparabie harrn’ roust still be shown.”*

Another understanding of the harm aspect of necessity links it to the balance of
convenience, resulting in what is sometimes expressed as a ‘balance of harm’.°? On
this interpretation—which was adopted by the tribunal in Burlington®'—the harm
feared by the requesting party must substantially outweigh the harm that is likely to
be suffered by the party against whom the measure is directed (if the measure is
granted}. This is the standard that applies under the 2006 version of the
UNCITRAL Model Law®—-a ternplate lew arbitri that, due to its adoption by a large
and diverse group of states, roay lend itself to tronc commun arguments in interna-
tional law settings.

In sum, necessity is a key condition, and while there is a significant bady of
authority for the proposition that a showing of ‘irreparable harm’ is required to estab-
lish that the provisional measures sought are necessary, the application of this stan-
dard is by no means a foregone conclusion. Applicants are naturally interested in
avoiding (or at least playing down) this standard, and usually do so by arguing for a
‘substantial prejudice’ threshold or a standard analogous to that codified in the
UNCITRAL Model Law. As a matter of strategy, this makes sense. For applicants,
the most hazardous aspect of ‘irreparable harm’ lies in the possibility of it being un-
derstood as ‘harrn not capable of being cured by an award of darnages’. In this regard,
Anglo-Saxon arbitrators (schooled in the tradition of American Cynamid®°) may pose
more of a risk than arbitrators from civil law backgrounds.°” Respondents, in

60 See, for example, Quitorax (n 31) para 187.

Gi There is 1C] authority to support the proposition that the power to grant provisional measures necessary
to prevent the aggravation of the dispute is self standing, and may be exercised ‘wherever [the court] con-
siders that circumstances so require’. See Land and Maritime Boundary tetween Cameroon and Nigeria,
Provisional Measures, Order of 15 March 1996, IC] Reports 1996, 13, para 41.

62 Pulp Mills (n 16) para 49.

63 See, for example, Tanzania Electric Supply Company Lid. v Independent Power Tanzania Lid. (ECSU Case
No ARB/$8/8), Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures, 20 December 1999,
para 17 Cthe balance of convenience, or looking at it from a different perspective, the balance of
harm ...’}.

64 Burlington (m 29) para 82.

65 See UNCITRAL Model Law, art 17(a}(1)(a}. For an example of an ICSID tribunal expressly relying on
this article of the UNCITRAL Model Law, see Quiborax (n 34) para 186.

66 American Cyanamid v Ethicon (1975) AC 396; (1978) 2 WLR 316 CHL). In this seminal English case,
Lord Diplock reasserted the rule of adequacy of damages as follows: ‘Tf damages in the measure recover-
able st commion law would be adequate remedy and the defendant would be in a financial position to pay
them, no interlocutory injunction should normally be granted, however strong the plaintiffs claim ap-
peared to be at that stage.’

67 The arbitrators’ broader views on remedies may play a role here. Jeff Waincymer put it well: Tow one
identifies when harm is irreparable depends in part on one’s views about remedies generally. For legal

406 > ICSID provisional measures

contrast, have every reason to push for the application of this standard, in the hope
that the tribunal will then accept the proposition that, in the world of foreign invest-
ment, there is little if anything that money cannot solve. It is probably with these ar-
gumenits in mind that many tribunals prefer a broader formulation of ‘irreparable or
serious harm’, and the jurisprudence would seem to be trending this way?

4.4 The granting of the measure must be urgent

it is now generally accepted in ECSED arbitration that an application for provisional
measures will be urgent where it entails “a question that cannot await the outcome of
the award on the merits’’ This understanding, which equates with the notion
of periculum in mora io civil law systems, treats the date of the final award {and not
the date of the application for provisional measures} as the temporal reference for ur-
gency. However, a review of the cases shows that at least two other temporal reter-
ences may also play a role in the analysis of urgency: the first is how long it is likely
to be before the feared act or event (and corresponding harm) occurs; the second is
how long the applicant (being reasonably informed of the prospect of that act or
event) has waited to bring its application for provisional relief. The latter point is
often raised by respondents, either to discredit the assertion of urgency or, better
yet, to prove that the status quo is in fact ‘liveable’,

Even though it does not feature in the text of Article 47 of the ECSED
Convention, urgency is, io practice, the most important consideration (even a sine

gua non’’) for the granting of provisional measures. Indeed, the decisions of some
tribunals show that, in certain circumstances, urgency can overshadow nearly all
other aspects of the inquiry. The June 2012 directions of the President of the ICSID
tribunal in Border Timbers provide an example of this.”*

systems that believe in damages as adequate compensation, there is less Likelihood that harm would be
seen as irreparable. Conversely, systems that support specific performance might see damages as inade-
quate in such circumstances and be more inclined towards interim measures that preserve the status qua.’
See ] Waincymer, Procedure and Evidence in International Arbitration (Rtuwer, The Hague, 2012) 626.

68 See, for example, Churchill Mining (a 20) para S6 Cirreparable or serious damage’); Abaclat et al. v
Argentine Republic ICSID Case No ARB/O7/S), Procedural Ord 11, 27 Fume 2012, para 11 (irreparable
harm or serious prejudice’).

69 Schreuer (n 13) 775; see also Mouwad and Silbert (n 11) 387 (‘The concept of urgency appears to have
evolved and relaxed somewhat over the years, morphing from a requirement that the harm be immedi-
ately ikely and imminent to the seemingly more widespread standard today that the harm occur prior to
the tribunal’s issuance of the final award’). Por case examples, see Biwater Gauff (n 36) para 76, where
the tribunal offered the following opinion on the notion of urgency: ‘(iln the Arbitral Tribumal’s view, the
degree of “urgency” which is required depends on the circumstances, including the requested provisional
measures, and may be satisfied where a party can prove that there is a need to obtain the requested mea-
sure at a certain point in the procedure before the issuance of an award. In most situations, this will
equate to “urgency” in the traditional sense (ie. a need for a measure in a short space of time}. In some
cases, however, the only time constraint is that the measure be granted before an award --- even if the
grant is to be some time hence. The Arbitral Tribunal also considers that the level of urgency required de-
pends on the type of measure which is requested’ See also Quiborax (1 31) para 150; Millicom (3) para
4& (Ue must be proven that if the measures are not ordered rapidly, there are serious risks that the rights
of the applicants will be jeopardized’}.

70 CN Brower and REM Goodman, ‘Provisional Measures and the Protection of ICSID Exclusivity against
Municipal Proceedings’ (1991) 6 ICSID Rev-FILJ 431, 461.

7L Bernhard von Pezold et ai. v Republic of Zimbabwe and Border Timbers Limited, Border Timbers
International (Private) Limited and Hangani Development Co (Private) Limited v Republic of Zimbabwe

ICSID provisional measures « 407

In Border Timbers, the respondent (Zimbabwe) demanded inspection (at the
claimants’ offices} of certain of the clairnants’ documents in a manner inconsistent
with the disclosure rules laid down by the Tribunal. Two days before the inspections
were due to take place, the claimants sought provisional measures inter alia directing
the respondent to comply with the docement disclosure rules set by the Tribunal.
The clairnants’ sought these orders on the basis that they were necessary to preserve
the status quo ‘pending further observations of the parties’, in other words ex parte.”
Significantly, fears of ‘intimidation and violence’ against the claimants’ staff were also
expressed in the application.”* The day after the request was made the President of
the Tribunal (L Yves Fortier CC QC)* made orders directing the respondent not
to proceed with the propased visit to the claimants’ offices, and to refrain from tak-
ing any farther steps in relation to the matters set out in its inspection demand letter,
pending final determination of the claimants’ application.”

The Border Timbers directions are interesting for three reasons: first, quasi-proce-
durally, as the application was roade and determined ex parte, the directions show ao
expansion of the notion of urgency (ie the application could not await the observa-
tions of the respondent, let alone the outcome of the award on the merits).”°
Secondly, the Border Timbers orders show the operation of the principle (expressed
in Biwater Gauff’’) that the level of urgency required depends on the type of mea-
sure requested. Finally, more on the substance, other than a brief reference to Rule
39,”* the reasons for the directions contain no references to authority or any discus-
sion of the principles that govern the granting of provisional measures. While the
risk of physical (and presumably irreparable) harm being suffered by the claimants’
employees seems to have played an important role, it is apparent that argency was
the main consideration that the President took into account.

GCSID Case No ARB 10/15, ICSHD Case No ARB 10/245), Directions Concerning Claimants’
Application for Provisional Measures of 12 June, 13 June 2012.

72 ibid para 3.
73 bid.
74 The President dealt with the claimants’ application on his own. Under the terms of reterence, the

President had the power to take decisions in respect of urgent matters alone, without consulting the other
members of the Tribunal, subject to the possibility of reconsideration of the decision by the full Tribunal.
ibid para 2.

75 ibid para 8. Orders were also made programming further observations by the parties.

76 itis to be noted that ibid, was not the first case in which provisional measures were recommended etfec-
tively ew parte (ie before the respondent's observations were presented). In Perenco (n 8}, after receiving
the claimant's request for provisional measures—which related to actions that would be taken in just
three days time--the tribunal took the relatively common step of issuing a ‘request’ to the parties to
‘retrain from initiating or continuing any action or adopting any measures which may, directly or indi-
rectly, modify the status quo between the parties vis-a-vis the participation contracts, including any at-
tempt to seize any asset of | Perenco], until it has had the opportunity to further hear frora the parties on
the question of provisional measures’. The tribunal later held that there was no merit to the respondent's
later argument that this ‘request’ lacked the force of a ‘recomanendation’ under art 47 of the ICSID
Convention. See Perenco (n 8) paras 28, 64-77. See also City Oriente Lid. v Republic of Ecuador &
Empresa Estatal Petroteos del Ecaudor (ICSUD Case No ARB/O6/21), Decision on Provisional Measures,
19 November 2007 (hereinatter ‘City Oriente 1°}, where the tribunal—without hearing from the respon-
dent----issued a similar ‘request’. City Oriente 1, ibid para 13.

77 Biwater Gauff (n 36) para 76.

78 Border Timbers (n 71) para 6.

408 » ICSID provisional measures

Despite its apparent primacy in conternporary ICSID practice, there is consider-
able divergence in the way urgency is understood and applied by tribunals (and par-
ties, for that matter). In particular, there is a good deal of overlap between the
notions of urgency and necessity. Looking at the case law, the bridge seems to be
‘irreparable harm’, a sub-element that has (unfortunately on one view, rightly on an-
other) been read into both the urgency and necessity elements from time to time.
The following extract of the provisional measures decision of the Perenco tribunal
provides a useful practical illustration of this bridge being crossed by the arbitrators:

[the Tribunal] will not judge that circumstances require the grant of provi-
sional measures unless it judges such measures to be necessary and urgent.
They must be necessary, because that is what ‘urgent’ means, and measures will
not be necessary where a party can be adequately compensated by an award of
damages if it successfully vindicates its rights when the case is finally decided.
Thus, as the Respondents correctly submit, many of the authorities express the

test in terms of ‘irreparable loss’...

For applicants, the preference is sometimes to avoid this overlap problern in the
first round, and simply choase one of the two elements—urgency or necessity—and
deal with the other in reply (if it is raised by the respondent). Another claimant
strategy is to alleviate the burden of having to show urgency by framing the measures
as being necessary to protect the ‘procedural integrity’ of the arbitration, and arguing
that the measures are therefore ‘urgent by definition’.”' Logically, this argument will
be most appealing where the measures relate to the preservation of evidence, as (in
the words of the Quiborax tribunal) ‘the question of whether a party has the oppor-
tunity to present its case or rely on the integrity of specitic evidence is essential to
(and therefore cannot wait) the rendering of an award on the merits’? While the
limits of ‘axiomatic urgency remain to be tested, this part of the Quiborax decision
suggests that something like a condition of ‘consequence’ applies to its invocation: to
establish that the measures are self-evidently urgent, the party requesting provisional
measures needs to show that there is an ‘essential’ link between the exercise of the
relevant procedural right and the issuance of a final award.

4.5 Proportionality
The test for proportionality weighs the competing interests at stake for both parties to
the dispute." The question of proportionality incorporates a ‘balance of convenience’

79 Perenco (n 8) para 43, emphasis added.

80 There is some sense to this strategy. In deciding which element to favour, the backgrounds of the arbitra-
tors would seem to be a legitimate consideration: arbitrators from public international law backgrounds
{such as specialized academics and former ICf judges} tend to focus on necessity, whereas those with
backgrounds in. commercial arbitration may be inclined to focus more on the question of urgency.

8h Quiboraw (v 31} para 153 CLi}f the measures are intended to protect the procedural integrity of the arbi-
tration, in particular with respect to the access to or integrity of the evidence, they are urgent by
definition’).

&2 ibid. See alsa Abaclat (n 68} para 20 (‘even if urgency were not at stake, the Tribunal finds that it can rec-
ammend provisional measures for the preservation of Respondent's rights of defence’).

83 Burlington (m 29) para 81 (citing Occidental (n 3) para 96); City Oriente 1 (nm 76) para 35.

ICSID provisional measures + 409

test (similar to that called for under the 2006 UNCITRAL Model Law), in which the
tribunal considers the harm that the applicant will suffer if the provisional measures it
seeks are not granted, and compares it to the harm (or inconvenience) that the respon-
dent will endure if the provisional measures are granted.**

The importance attributed to proportionality tends to vary depending on the na-
ture of provisional measures sought. Often, and particularly where the arbitrators
have backgrounds in commercial arbitration, proportionality (or at least consider-
ations germane to it) will be addressed as part of the ‘balance of convenience’ that
guides the tribunal in the overall assessment of the case. The recommendation of the
Saipem tribunal provides a useful ilhistration:

.., the Tribunal considers that under Article 47 of the LICSID] Convention a
tribunal enjoys broad discretion when ruling on provisional measures, but
should not recommend provisional measures lightly and should weigh the par-
ties’ divergent interests in the light of all the circumstances of the case.*°

Provisional measures applications directed at preventing or suspending the enact-
ment of local laws or regulations seem to be most closely exarnined for proportional-
ity."°
delicate question arises as to whether (and to what extent} an ICSID tribunal can

This makes sense because, where the feared measure is legislative in nature, a

interfere with the right of a sovereign state to legislate in respect of its own internal
affairs. While ICSID tribunals are generally averse to such interference, there have
been a mumber of cases where ICSID tribunals have recommended in the form of
provisional measures that states withhold or suspend implementation of legislative
acts.” In Perenco, the ICSID tribunal framed the rationale for provisional measures
to restrain acts of a legislative character in the following terms:

It is pertinent to recall that in any ICSID arbitration one of the parties will be
a sovereign State, and where provisional measures are granted against it, the
effect is necessarily to restrict the freedom of the State to act as it would wish.
Interim measures may thus restrain a State from enforcing a law pending final
resolution of the dispute on the merits, as in City Oriente ...°°

lt should be noted that, when provisional measures are ordered in TCSED arbitra-
tion, the party for whose benefit the provisional measures are granted is sometimes
required to provide security (such as a bank guarantee or an escrow deposit) to
account for the losses that the respondent may suffer as a result of the provisional

&4 See, for example, Quiborax (n 31) para 158.

8§ Saipem (n 7), Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures, 21 March 2007,
para 175, emphasis added (citations omitted).

86 Proportionality analyses ave also often conducted where the measures sought are directed at restraining
public prosecutions in the host state. See, for example, Quiboram (1 31) paras 158-65.

Q

See, for example, Burlington (1 29); Perence (n 8), and City Oriente 1 (a 57). In City Oriente 1, Burlington,
and Perenco, ICSID tribunals ordered Ecuador te step imposing the so-called ‘windfall profits tax’ on

iv

chase investors’ hydrocarbon preduction, pending the outcome of disputes over whether the tax violated
agreements between the investors and the state-owned oil company.
&& — Perenco (n 8) para 50.

419 » ICSID provisional measures

measures being imposed.” This requirement has two main purposes: first, it serves
the interests of proportionality in that it ensures that respondents do nat themselves
suffer harm as a result of their being subjected to provisional measures (and later vin-
dicated on the merits); second, it functions as a check on abuses of the system, the
idea being that if applicants have to ‘ante up’, they will be less likely to make frivolous
provisional measures applications.

5. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
While each of the five requirements discussed above has an established place in
ICSID jurisprudence on provisional measures, other considerations are sometimes
taken into account by international tribunals,

One example is the requirernent that the party seeking provisional measures have
‘clean hands’.”° General principles of fairness (and arguably good faith”’) inform all
stages of the ICSED process, and where a party has clearly misbehaved (or acted un-
lawfully}, the arbitrators will take such conduct into account in determining whether
provisional measures should be granted.”” Whether this requirement is expressed in

the common law form of ‘clean hands’, as an aspect of the Roman law principle of

exceptio inadimpleti contracius, ox simply as a broader question of entitlement (does
the applicant deserve protection?’), the result will be the sarne.

Another consideration is whether the measures being sought would actually be
capable of being carried out and policed by the tribunal—a consideration that is

&9 See, tor example, ibid, where the tribunal invited the parties to establish an escrow account to hold the
disputed payments, and gave the parties leave to apply to the tribunal for orders if the account was not es-
tablished within 120 days.

90 Although there do not appear to be any published ICSID decisions or awards dealing with ‘clean hands’
explicitly, the doctrine does appear to have a place in IC] jurisprudence, and in international law more
generally. See, for example, the dissenting opinion of Judge Schwebel in Military and Paramilitary
Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v United States of America}, Merits Judgment, [C} Reports
{1986) 380-81, 392-94, where His Excellency referred to a string of PCY) decisions (including that in
Diversion of Water from the Meuse, PCH Series A/B, No 7U, 77) as authority for the existence of the dac-
trine at international law. Similarly, in commenting on the Cuse Concerning Legality of Use of Force

(Yugoslavia v ten NATO states; Provisional Measures, IC] Reports 1999, 77) Fudge Schwebel noted that if

prima facie jarisdiction had been found by the Court, it would then have had to consider its discretion te
refuse an order granting interim measures because the respondents raised the issue of clean bands on the
part of Yugoslavia. See S Schwebel, ‘Clean Hands in the Court’ (1991) 31 Stud Trans Legal Policy 74,
9% See, for example, Phoenix Action v Czech Republic ACSID Case No ARB/O6/S), Award, 15 April 2609,
pars 133, where accepting the universality of the requirement of good faith in international trade, the tri-
bunal said ‘this caveat is fundamental’. For examples of where this good faith duty has been extended to
matters af procedure, see Churchill Mining (n 20) para 46 (‘the parties are bound by a good faith duty
not to exacerbate the dispute or affect the integrity of the arbitration proceedings’); and Caratube (n 14)
para 120 (The Tribunal confirms that the Parties have an obligation to conduct the procedure in good
faith and that this obligation includes a duty to avoid any unnecessary aggravation of the dispute ...’).
92 See C Lamm, H Pham and R Moios, ‘Fraud and Corruption in International Arbitration’, in M
Fernandez-Ballesteros and D Arias (eds), Liber Amicorum Bernardo Cremades (La Ley, Buenos Aires,
2010} 724. in making findings as to jurisdiction and admissibility, several ICSUD tribunals have taken into
account the conduct of the investor(s), including misrepresentations, acts of fraud, bribes, and other cor-

rupt dealings. See, for example, Plama (n 15) paras 134-46, 321; Inceysa Vallisoletana, S.L. v Republic of

El Salvadar (ICSED Case No ARB/03/26), Award, 2 August 2006, paras 234-42; and World Duty Free
Company Limited v Republic of Kenya (ECSID Case No ARB/00/7), Award, 4 October 2006, para 187.

ICSID provisional measures « 414

sometimes thought of as an outgrowth of the tribunal's general duty to render an en-
forceable award.”’

An additional point that is sometimes raised by applicants—uswally in the context
of necessity or urgency—is the complexity of the harm that the requesting party
fears it will suffer if the measures it seeks are not granted.’ If the harm can be easily
compensated with money, provisional measures will not normally be granted’;
if the valuation of the harm would be difficult (or impossible), its prevention is more
easily justified.”* The nature of the investment will obviously be relevant here: if the
investroent is inherently difficult to value (and ergo the harm to it difficult to quantify
and ‘adequately’ compensate in damages), the balance of convenience may tip in fa-
vour of the applicant. Intangible investments such as goodwill are naturally suited to
such arguments.”’

Finally, respondents sometimes argue (relying on SGS”*) that there is a re-
guirement that the provisional measures sought must not be ‘too broad’. Such a
requirement could be seen as a function of proportionality, a corollary of necessity,
or simply a matter of common sense. However, there are sound arguments against it:
the words of Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 do not set any express
limits on the scope of the measures that can be recommended,” and sorne measures
are inherently broad (orders to maintain the status quo being the most obvious exam-
ple}. When deciding whether to argue for the application of this requirement, the re-
spondent should consider these points, and also take care to ensure that, in objecting
to the breadth of a proposed measure, it does not tacitly accept that a measure of
some breadth is necessary.

Whether these additional elements have any place in a request, response or deci-
sion will depend entirely on the facts of the case and the types of roeasures sought.
When they are taken into account, they are rarely given the status of conditions
proper, but are instead normally paired with one of the five established elements of
the test for provisional measures.

$3 See, for example, Burlington (n 29} para 86, where (in establishing an escrow account as a provisional
measure} the tribunal took into consideration the respondent’s argument that the proposed measure
would be ‘unmanageable’.

94 See, for example, Plama (n £8) paras 8, 22; see also Quiborax (mn 31) para 157,

98 See, for example, Plama, ibid paras 42, 46; Occidental (n 3} para 92; CEMEX (n 13) para S8; Perenco (n
8) para 43.

96 See, for example, Burlington (1129) para 83, where after adopting a standard of ‘harm not adequately repa-

rable by an award of damages’, the tribunal stated that ‘this case is not one of only “more damages”

caused by the passage of time. It is a case of avoidance of a different damage’ (emphasis added). See also

Quiborax (n 31) para 156; Perenco (n 8) paras 53, 60; CEMEX (n 13) paras 45-35.

However, some tribunals have been resistant to the proposition that damage to business reputation can-

sO
“I

not be adequately remedied by money damages. See, for example, Helnan International Hotels AS. v Arab
Republic of Egypt GICSID Case No ARB/05/19), Decision on Claimant’s Request for Provisional
Measures, 17 May 2006, para 34 (Should damage to Helnan’s reputation be established, the Arbitral
Tribunal considers that monetary compensation would be an adequate remedy’).
98 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA v Islamic Republic ef Pakistan (ICSUD Case No ARB/O1/13),
Procedural Ord 2, 16 October 2002, 18 ICSUD Rev-FIL] 301, 301,
Caratube (n 14) para 136 (‘the language authorising ICSID Tribunals in Article 47 of the [ICSID]
Convention and Rule 39 is very broad and does not give any indication that any specific state action must

Ke
Ke)

be excluded trom the scope of possible provisional measures. Therefore, this Tribunal does not agree
with the strict approach which seems to have been taken by the Tribunal in the SGS decision ...”).

412 » ICSID provisional measures

6. CONCLUDING REMARKS

There is no roadmap for provisional measures in ECSID arbitration. This is partly be-
cause the terrain is becoming more coroplex, particularly as the genus of ‘procedural
integrity measures expands. At present, all that can be said with certainty is that each
application will turn on its own facts, and although consensus is apparent, or at least
emerging, on some elements of the soi-disant “ICSID test’ Gurgency and necessity be-
ing the leaders overall}, the rules of substance remain a matter of submission.
Lawyers making and responding to applications for provisional measures roust,
therefore, try to anticipate what the focus of their arbitrators will be.

This article has identitied three main considerations in this regard: first, the cir-
cumstances in which the application is made; secondly, the nature of the measures
sought (and the harm they seek to prevent), and finally, the backgrounds of the arbi-
trators themselves. The main observation of this article is, however, that the prefer-
ence of most ICSID arbitrators is to evaluate the request in the round. In this
approach, the legal emphasis of the tribunal is usually on the text of Article 47 of the
{CSID Convention itself—rather than the secondary elements that can be read into
it—-with the material facts of the request then being assessed overall to determine
whether ‘the circumstances so require’ provisional measures.

While this adjudicatory practice makes sense-—-especially where the measures are
sought with the utmost urgency (like in Border Timbers), and there is little or no
time for a mechanical assessment to be carried out-—it seems to be enabling certain
gray areas to persist in the jurisprudence. The overlap of the notions of urgency and
necessity, and the standard of harm (‘irreparable’, ‘substantial’, or ‘serious’) embed-
ded in either or both elements, is an example of an area in which brighter lines might
be useful. Similarly, the borders of ‘procedural integrity’ will need to be marked out
more clearly for users to understand when the special rules that attach to this class of
measures apply.

What is clear is that the practices of lawyers and arbitrators in the field of provi-
sional measures are heavily informed by experience and heritage. Although ICSID ar-
bitration takes place on its own supra-national plane, it is clear that--either through
the agency of the arbitrators themselves or the medium of shared instruments such
as the UNCITRAL Rules—the law and practice of international commercial arbitra-
tion is informing the jurisprudence of provisional measures in investment treaty dis-
putes generally, and [CSID arbitration specifically. Practitioners who wark in both
fields are, therefore, justified in following their instincts when they evaluate as a
whole their prospects of obtaining or resisting provisional measures.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author is grateful to Georgios Petrochilos, Peter Turner QC, Cameron Miles,
and Ben Love for their comments on earlier dratts of this article. Naturally, any er-
rors are for the writer's account alone.

