Time to Evaluate the Standards for
Issuance of Interim Measures of Protection

in International Investment Arbitration

by JOE MATTHEWS and KAREN STEWART*

ABSTRACT

The pressure on international arbitral tribunals to decide on requests for interim measures in high
stakes international arbitration is likely to grow rapidly as the global economy continues to
weaken and the number of investment disputes, both before the International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes (ICSID) tribunals and ad hoc tribunal proceedings under United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) Rules, increases. Although the
individual decisions of the tribunals are not binding on one another, it 1s generally accepted that
from these decisions there 1s the development of a special jurisprudence in investment arbitration.
The danger inherent in this sttuation 1s that all decisions of all tribunals ‘have in principle
equal status as concerns the potential for normative influence’. This influence will only increase
as more awards are available for review. Recently, in Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden
East Company and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Company, Claimants v. Government of
Mongolia (‘Paushok v. Mongolia’), a 2008 ad hoc investment arbitration conducted under
UNCITRAL Rules, the tribunal entered an interim award without reference to any specific
authority but nonetheless applied a list of criteria taken from international investment arbitration
junsprudence as a guide to its decision-making. Using Paushok v. Mongolia as a framework,
the authors have critically evaluated tribunals’ relance on what they deem ‘leading authority’ and
the reasoning process used. From this analysis, the authors propose standards for tribunals to
consider in the application for issuance of interim measures in international investment
arbitration under both ICSID and UNCITRAL Rules and discuss how each factor should be
analysed, as well as the quantum of proof required for each. At a minimum, the authors hope
that their proposed standards provoke discussion on whether there is in actuality a set of

* Joe Matthews is a US. based international advocate and arbitrator. He is of counsel with the Law Firm of
Colson Hicks Eidson, P.A. and principal of Joseph M. Matthews, P.A., in Miami, Florida and Washington,
D.C. He is a member of the board of directors of the American Arbitration Association. Karen Stewart is a
former Colson Scholar at the University of Miami School of Law and a lawyer with the Law Firm of Colson
Hicks Eidson, PA. She is a former law clerk for the Honorable Donald Graham, U.S. District Court Judge,
Southern District of Florida.

ARBITRATION INTERNATIONAL, Vol. 25, No. 4
© LCIA, 2009

529

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
530 Arbitration International, Volume 25 Issue 4

internationally recognised standards to be met before a tribunal will issue an order in support of
interim measures, and if so what should provide the basis for that standard.

I. INTRODUCTION

IN SEPTEMBER 2008, a distinguished panel of arbitrators entered an order on
interim measures in an ad hoc investment arbitration conducted under the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) Rules in
Serget Paushok, CPSC Golden East Company and CPSC Vostoknefiegaz Company, Claimants
v. Government of Mongolia (‘Paushok v. Mongolia’). In Paushok v. Mongolia, the claimants,
the Russian owners of gold mining and oil and gas companies KOO Golden
East-Mongolia (GEM’) and KOO Vostokneftegaz-Mongolia, brought a claim
against the Republic of Mongolia to challenge application of Mongolia’s 2006
Windfall Profits Tax Law and its 2006 Minerals Law, both of which were
legislative acts duly adopted by the State Great Hural, the democratically elected!
legislative branch of government for Mongolia. The claimants alleged that the
laws were in violation of the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments between the Government of the Russian Federation
and the Government of Mongolia (‘the BIT”).

The tribunal, Dr Horacio Grigera Naon, nominated by the claimants, Prof:
Brigitte Stern, nominated by Mongolia, and Marc Lalonde, serving as President,
unanimously entered its order on interim measures (‘Interim Order’) which
included the following extraordinary provisions (at para.16):

Claimants’ application for interim measures of protection under Article 26 of the UNCITRAL
rules is granted in accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions below:

1. Payment to Respondent of the Windfall Profit Tax owing by GEM (including interest and
penalties) is suspended until the Tribunal has ruled on the merits of Claimants’ request for
relief.

2. Taking note of the undertaking previously made by Respondent on March 19, 2008 and
confirmed at the Hearing, Respondent shall refrain from seizing or obtaining a lien on the
assets of GEM and other assets of Claimants in connection with the Windfall Profit Tax
owing to Respondent or from directly or indirectly taking any other action leading to the
same or similar effect, except in accordance with the Tribunal’s Orders, and shall allow
GEM and Claimants to maintain their ordinary business operations in Mongolia.

3. Following their previous undertaking in that regard on March 26, 2008, Claimants shall
not move assets out of Mongolia, nor take any action which would alter in any way the
ownership and/or financial interests of Claimants with respect to their assets in Mongolia,
without prior notice to and agreement of Respondent. Sale and pledges of gold are
authorized provided the funds thus obtained are used for the ordinary business operations
of GEM. Under no circumstances should such funds be used for other purposes; in

1 The modern country of Mongolia represents only part of the Mongols’ historical homeland; more Mongols
live in the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region in the People’s Republic of China than in the Republic of
Mongolia, which was a former satellite of the Soviet Union.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
Time to Evaluate the Standards for Issuance 531

particular, no transfer of funds or assets of any kind should be made outside of Mongolia
(except for deposit into the escrow account under the conditions described below) or to
any of the Claimants or any person, corporation or business related to them, without
Respondent’s agreement.

4. Claimants shall provide gradually increasing security as described below. The Tribunal
may increase or decrease the security for good cause shown premised on the evolution of

GEM’s business.

The tribunal then ordered the creation of an escrow account in a financial
institution outside of Russia and Mongolia and established a very detailed set of
procedures for the claimants to pay taxes into the escrow account, beginning at
a rate of US$2 million per month, with extensive provisions for disclosure of
financial information and opportunities for both parties to seek modifications to
the procedures (Interim Order, paras. 16-17).

Effectively, the tribunal inserted itself between a sovereign democratic republic
and a corporation created and existing under the laws of that republic but owned
100 per cent by nationals of another sovereign, suspending the obligation to pay
millions of dollars of taxes each month, but creating a fund under the control of
the tribunal in an amount designed to ensure that the sovereign would be able to
collect the taxes should it prevail in the arbitration. The tribunal thus made itself
not only the tax court, but the tax collector as well, and ensured the ability to
collect the tax on behalf of the Republic should it prevail.

Whether correct or incorrect as a matter of law, wise or unwise as a matter of
policy, just or unjust as to the parties before it, the existence of this Interim Order?
in the public domain, and the fact that it purports to be based on numerous other
international arbitration precedents, requires that the international arbitration
community evaluate the legal standards upon which it was based and whether
those standards are appropriate. The pressure on international arbitral tribunals
to decide on requests for interim measures in high stakes international arbitration
is likely to grow rapidly as the global economy continues to weaken and the
number of investment disputes, both before International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes (ICSID) tribunals and ad hoc tribunal proceedings under
UNCITRAL Rules, increases. Recent high profile Mareva injunctions? issued by
lower courts and then reversed by appellate courtst make it seem likely that

2 It is not clear to the authors precisely how this award entered the public domain. It was referenced on the
OGEMID listserv in a post by Prof. Andrew Newcombe on 3 November 2008 and is posted there at
www.transnational-dispute-management.com/members/ogemid/2008/ 1 1/msg00002.asp?highlight=mongolia.
Attempts to inquire of counsel for the parties to obtain the parties’ submissions have thus far been
unenlightening and unsuccessful.

3 So named from the case which first upheld its use, Mareva Compania Naviera, SA v. International Bulkcarriers, SA
[1975] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 509.

+ In the most publicised recent case, Mobil Cerro Negro obtained a Mareva injunction from a UK court
freezing bank accounts and assets belonging to Venezuela’s state-owned oil company Petroleas de Venezuela
worldwide in February 2008. On appeal, the UK High Court reversed the injunction and ordered Mobil to
pay PDVSA‘s attorneys fees and costs. Mobil Cerro Negro, Lid v. Petroleos de Venezuela, SA [2008] EWHC
(Comm.) 532.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
532 Arbitration International, Volume 25 Issue 4

arbitrators rather than courts will be asked to enter emergency interim relief with
increasing frequency.>

After a brief description of the recent history of Mongolia, including its
relations with giant neighbours Russia to the north and China to the south and
the importance of its mineral wealth, this article will (1) analyse the Interim
Order in Paushok v. Mongolia, critically examining the standards employed by that
tribunal; (2) provide a brief summary of the standards for issuance of preliminary
injunctive relief in the United States and a few other jurisdictions; (3) propose
a revised set of standards to be applied by arbitrators sitting in international
investment disputes when presented with requests for interim measures; and
(4) provide argument and authority for the proposed standards.

Il. MONGOLIA’S RECENT HISTORY®

(a) Relationship with China and the Former Soviet Union

From its independence in the 1920s after several centuries of dominance by its
neighbour to the south, the People’s Republic of China, the independent republic
of Mongolia was a loyal ally of the Soviet Union until its demise in 1989. Russia
helped Mongolians living north and west of the Gobi Desert and the great
steppes to fight for their independence, and after its independence from China,
Mongolia fought alongside Russian troops in the Second World War and
remained a loyal client state of the Soviet Union to the bitter end, while the
residents of what is now the autonomous region of Inner Mongolia remained a
minority population within China. It is unique among the ‘divided nations’ of the
twentieth century in that the division was not along Cold War lines but rather
between the two giants of the world communist movement. Russian influence,
including architecture, a modified version of the Cyrillic alphabet and overlapping
culture, remains omnipresent in the capital city of Ulaanbaatar (Ulan Bator).
However, the Chinese have begun to make quiet inroads, particularly in the
construction and coal extraction industries.

When the Soviet Union collapsed in 1989, Mongolia’ went through economic
‘shock therapy’ transition from a centrally controlled ‘command’ economy with

5 A just released article by J.A. Rueda-Garcia, ‘Provisional Measures in Investment Arbitration: Recent Experiences
in Oil Arbitrations Against the Republic of Ecuador’ in (2009) 6(1) Transnational Dispute Management (March),
provides a somewhat similar analysis of provisional measures through examination of three ICSID cases
brought against the Republic of Ecuador. All three cases involved the oil industry and one of the cases, Occidental
Petroleum Corp. v. Ecuador, 1CSYD Case no. ARB/06/11, [2007] TIC 305, Decision on Provisional Measures,
17 August 2007, is discussed at length in the Interim Order in Paushok v. Mongolia and is discussed infra.

6 This history was developed largely from the experience of one of the authors in teaching at the National
University of Mongolia School of Law in 2006 and incorporated into a lecture delivered at the University of
Dundee in September 2006. It is extracted and reprinted with some updating from J.M. Matthews, “The
Case for Arbitration Rules that Presumptively Grant Public Access to All Arbitration Proceedings’ in (2006)
3(5) Transnational Dispute Management (December).

7 Inner Mongolia, as an autonomous region of the People’s Republic of China, has travelled a very different
transitional path. It remains a part of the PRC.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
Time to Evaluate the Standards for Issuance 533

government ownership of virtually all assets, to a liberal free market economy
based on recognition of property rights, enforcement of contract rights and
respect for the rule of law. Unfortunately, like most other former Soviet satellites,
based on the ‘Washington Consensus’® Mongolia’s shock therapy resulted in
uneven and unfair privatization of government assets that inevitably favoured
those who had been in positions of power just prior to the transition, ze. the
former Communist Party leadership.

(6) A Legacy of Corruption Within a Functioning Democracy

In Mongolia, as in Russia, Eastern Europe and the other former Soviet satellites,
the result of the transition was the creation of a culture of corruption.? Equally
important and perhaps even more troubling were one of the primary side-effects
and the handmaiden of corruption — the explosion of black markets and their
self-fulfilling prophecy of bad government. Black markets are in some ways more
troubling than corruption because there are international conventions and near
uniform condemnation of corruption, but black markets are in many ways
understandable. It is hard to be critical of those who are willing to work at several
jobs in an economy that is not providing adequate wages to survive, but not
willing to declare income and pay taxes to a corrupt and incompetent
government.

The Chairman of the Mongolian National Chamber of Commerce and
Industry (MCCI), Mr 8. Demberel, has estimated that the ‘informal economy’
(ze. black market) was near 25 per cent of the total Gross Domestic Product. The
World Bank estimates that the official GDP was US$1.6 billion in 2004. With a
total population of 2.5 million, 36 per cent of whom live below the officially
defined poverty line, the official Gross National Income per person (calculated
pursuant to the Atlas method) was US$600 in 2004. Most troubling 1s the fact
that 23 per cent of the population lives in extreme poverty on an income of less
than US$0.40 per day. Walking the streets of Ulan Bator is an experience that
ensures one will be accosted by young street children at nearly every corner
pleading with the only English word they have learned to speak — ‘money’.

Valid statistical data regarding corruption is notoriously difficult to come by
the world over. Mongolia ranked 85th on the Corruption Perception Index for
2005 which is the most widely accepted measure of corruption published by

8 The ‘Washington Consensus’ refers to economic policies put forth by the Congress and administration of the
United States as well as by the Washington DC-based International Monetary Fund and World Bank. Some
of the elements of this Consensus are trade liberalisation, privatisation, deregulation, etc. that are often
applied to all countries and all situations.

9 Transparency International’s National Integrity Systems Country Study Report on Mongolia, published in 2001,
concluded that ‘[c]orruption in Mongolia has thrived in recent years on the opportunities presented by the
move to a market economy, by democratization and privatization’. It further concluded that ‘[s]ince the start
of the transition, corruption has spread in the community, is growing and has reached worrying proportions,
although the exact extent of it is not known’. See www.transparency.org/policy_research/nis/regional/
europe_central_asia.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
534 Arbitration International, Volume 25 Issue 4

Transparency International.!° In Mongolia, the MCCI, with the financial
support of the Asia Foundation,!! commissioned a survey for the purpose of
investigating the character and impact of corruption in the Mongolian business
sector. The MCCI summary, although in imperfect English, is nonetheless
compelling:

The goal of the survey was to study how often entrepreneurs face corruption and what size of
corruption they do. To our question ‘How often do you have to make bribery in order to have
your work run smooth?’ 66.1% said ‘sometimes’, 9.4% answered ‘always’ and 24.4% said
‘never’. From these figures we can come to a conclusion that three fourths of people are involved
in corruption.

In response to a request that the survey respondents name five organizations
that are most corrupted, judicial institutions were listed by 41.6 per cent of the
respondents, the second largest number, with the Customs Office, Tax Office,
police and banks as the top five on the list.!?

In spite of the corruption, Mongolia has a vibrant democracy that has
produced a series of elections relatively fair and free of impropriety with
reasonably efficient and mostly non-violent transfers of power between the major
political parties. Following a peaceful democratic revolution, the ex-Communist
Mongolian People’s Revolutionary Party (MPRP) won elections in 1990 and
1992, but was defeated by the Democratic Union Coalition (DUC) in the 1996
parliamentary election. The MPRP won an overwhelming majority in the 2000
parliamentary election, but the party lost seats in the 2004 election and shared
power with democratic coalition parties from 2004 to 2008. The MPRP regained
a solid majority in the 2008 parliamentary elections; the Prime Minister and a
majority of cabinet members are currently MPRP members. !4

(c) Significance of Mongolia’s Mineral Wealth

Finally, in order to put the dispute involved in Paushok v. Mongolia into perspective,
it is important to know that Mongolia has enormous mineral wealth, both
developed and undeveloped. Despite being one of the world’s poorest countries,
Mongolia’s reserves of natural resources have drawn increasing international
interest. There are vast deposits of copper, gold, silver, iron ore, phosphorous and

0 Transparency International, the global civil society organisation leading the fight against corruption, brings
people together in a powerful worldwide coalition to end the devastating impact of corruption on men,
women and children around the world. See www.transparency.org/about_us.

'! A non-profit, non-governmental organisation committed to the development of a peaceful, prosperous, just
and open Asia-Pacific region. See www.asiafoundation.org/about.

12 The MCCI Study Report on Corruption in the Business Sector concluded, again in imperfect but compelling
English, as follows: ‘Because of unfair privatization process, immorality of state officers, insufficiently
developed law, which is not enforced in life and illegally appropriated state property, values of society and
morality fall down. Today’s society loses its values, while falsity and unfairness dominate. This should
become a warning for everybody that our society is being destroyed from its roots’.

'3° Central Intelligence Agency, World Factbook, available at www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-the-world-
factbook/geos/mg.html.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
Time to Evaluate the Standards for Issuance 535

zinc hidden below its famous grasslands. Mongolia also has the biggest known
coal reserves in the world. It possesses some of the largest proven reserves of gold,
copper and uranium in the world. Not surprisingly, Mongolia does not itself have
the technological or economic capacity to develop these resources, and given its
historical relations with Russia, the most productive of these efforts were initiated
during the period of the Soviet empire and were transferred to either public or
private Russian interests after 1989.

Even the history of Western foreign direct investment inevitably involves
Russia and rumours of corruption. Ivanhoe Mines, Ltd (Canada) owns
development rights to gold and copper reserves in the Gobi Desert (Oyu Tolgoi)
and its history is illustrative of the Russian influence on Mongolia’s mineral
development history. Robert Friedland, the founder and CEO of Ivanhoe, loaned
the government of Mongolia money to pay off a staggering Russian debt
accumulated during the Soviet years. Ivanhoe is reported to have loaned the
country approximately US$25 million. It is highly likely that the Ivanhoe loan
proceeds in fact were used to pay off some or all of the old Soviet indebtedness.
Nonetheless, it is commonly assumed by many in Mongolia that some or all of
the loan proceeds made their way into the hands of corrupt Mongolian
government officials who negotiated a long-term deal with Ivanhoe for the
exploitation of the Gobi gold and copper. From Ivanhoe’s perspective, it has
already invested more than US$500 million and expects to invest as much as
US$2 billion before it begins to pull the gold and copper out of the ground and
sell it. With the fall in world commodity prices, Ivanhoe formed a joint venture
with mining giant Rio Tinto in the hopes of continuing its efforts to profit from
the Oyu Tolgoi operations.

As the global cost of commodities began to skyrocket from 2004 to 2006,
questions about whether Mongolia was receiving a fair share of the proceeds
from the development and sale of these resources, whether the fragile grassland
environment was being adequately protected, and whether enough Mongolians
were being employed in the extraction industries became very important political
issues in Mongolian national election campaigns. Mining contributes about 20
per cent of the GDP of Mongolia and the regulated mining sector employs over
12,000 people, while many more are engaged in unregulated mining. !+ Ivanhoe’s
Oyu Tolgoi development is projected to produce more than one billion pounds of
copper and 330,000 ounces of gold per year for 35 years, but many Mongolians
fear the growing foreign influence and environmental damage to the grasslands. !5
In May 2006, demonstrators burned an effigy of Robert Friedland in protest
against the proposed project. Shortly thereafter, Parliament enacted the windfall
mining profit tax authorising the imposition of taxes of 68 per cent on gold when
it exceeds US$500 per ounce and on copper over US$2,600 per ton. !®

4 ‘The Battle for Mongolia’s Resources’ (3 July 2008), available at Aljazeera.net,.

'S To be sure, the most intractable environmental problems are presented by the unregulated native miners, not
the multinational corporations.

16 See supra n. 14.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
536 Arbitration International, Volume 25 Issue 4

Against this backdrop, the Russian owners of the Mongolian registered gold
mining and oil and gas companies commenced their arbitration claim against
Mongolia.

Ili. ANALYSIS OF THE INTERIM ORDER IN
PAUSHOKv. MONGOLIA

The authors have attempted to speak with counsel for the parties and to obtain
copies of the submissions that would permit a more thorough presentation of the
facts involved in this dispute, but have been unable to obtain copies of the parties’
submissions. Consequently, the following recitation of the claims relies almost
entirely upon the limited facts set forth in the Interim Order.!’

(a) Claimants and Claims

The claimants were a Russian national and two corporations that were both
registered in the Russian Federation. CJSC Golden East Company and CJSC
Vostokneftegaz Company, the corporate claimants, respectively owned (directly
or indirectly) 100 per cent of the outstanding shares of two Mongolian registered
companies, KOO Golden East-Mongolia ((GEM’) and KOO Vostokneftegaz-
Mongolia (‘V-Mongolia’). The individual claimant, Mr Paushok, was the
Executive Director of GEM and the indirect owner of 100 per cent of the shares
of GEM.

The tribunal summarised the claims as follows (Interim Order, para. 6):

The subject matter of this dispute is the validity under the Treaty of the Windfall Profit Tax and
of the levying of a fee for the import of foreign workers imposed by Respondent. In their Notice
of Arbitration of November 30, 2007, Claimants request declaratory relief based on Articles 3(1)
and 4 of the Treaty as well as damages, interest and costs. And, in their Statement of Claim filed
on June 27, 2008, Claimants request declaratory relief with regard to those two types of
measures as contrary to Articles 2, 3 and 4 of the Treaty; in addition, they claim damages,
interest and costs to be determined by the Tribunal.

‘Two days after the constitution of the tribunal, the claimants filed a request for
interim measures, including a temporary restraining order (TRO). The motion

17 The authors provided a draft of this article to counsel for the parties and requested input to correct any
mistaken assumptions of fact. The authors sincerely hope that the parties to this action will make available
to the public all submissions upon which the tribunal relied in reaching the Interim Order but until then, we
will attempt to limit the analysis to facts that appear not to be in dispute and, where unclear, we will attempt
to identify the lack of clarity. The Interim Order itself makes reference to a number of media reports and,
with respect to its characterisation of the Windfall Profits Tax, the tribunal based its conclusions upon a
‘written undertaking given by the State Secretary of the Minister of Justice and Home Affairs on March 19,
2008’: the tribunal noted that one of the specific features of the request for interim relief unique to this case
was that ‘[i]n particular, the Government of Mongolia, while not admitting to any illegality in the measures
which have been enacted and which are challenged in this case, has recognized, both in 2007 and 2008, that
the WPT Law was not achieving its objectives and should be replaced by a less severe taxation regime’
(Interim Order, para. 43).

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
Time to Evaluate the Standards for Issuance 937

for the TRO appears to have focused on the claim of GEM and requested an
order suspending enforcement of the Windfall Profits Tax, the 2006 Minerals
Law and penalties for alleged late tax payments; suspension of any criminal
action against GEM; and suspension of any other conduct that ‘aggravates the
dispute, including, but not limited to, disparagement of Claimants or their
investment in the media or unjustified refusal of permission to continue to mine
gold in the same way and at the same levels as were approved in 2006 and 2007’
(Interim Order, para. 2).

On 23 March 2008, the tribunal entered a TRO that appears to have been
based on some agreement by Mongolia that it would not seize or place a lien on
the assets of the claimants and would allow them to continue their ordinary
business operations in exchange for a commitment by the claimants that they
would not move assets out of the country or alter their ownership structure in an
attempt to secrete assets.

On 8 July 2008, a hearing was conducted at the offices of the tribunal
president’s law firm in Montreal. Thereafter, on 2 September 2008, the tribunal
entered the Interim Order.

(b) Applicable Rules, Law, Evidentiary Burden and Criteria Applied by the Trbunal

The tribunal began by noting that its power relating to interim measures was set
forth in articles 15(1), 26(1) and 26(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules. In doing so, the
tribunal concluded that the authority granted by these rules exceeded the more
limited authority to award interim relief contained in article 47 of the ICSID
Convention and rule 39 of the ICSID Rules (Interim Order, para. 6). Nonetheless,
the tribunal, citing an ICSID case, Emiho Agustin Maffezini v. Spain,!® acknowledged
that interim measures are extraordinary measures not to be granted lightly. The
tribunal also noted that the evidentiary burden is on the claimants to ‘demonstrate
that their request is meeting the standards internationally recognized as pre-
conditions for such measures’. Interestingly, the tribunal cited another ICSID
decision, Occidental Petroleum Corp. v. Ecuador'9 (Interim Order, para. 6). Professor
Stern was a member of that tribunal as well as the Paushok tribunal.

With respect to the ‘criteria guiding the tribunal’, the tribunal in Paushok
v. Mongolha stated, without reference to specific authority (Interim Award, paras.
7-8):

It is internationally recognized that five standards have to be met before a tribunal will issue an
order in support of interim measures. They are (1) prima facie jurisdiction, (2) prima facie
establishment of the case, (3) urgency, (4) imminent danger of serious prejudice (necessity) and

(5) proportionality.

'8 ICSID Case no. ARB/97/7, [1999] IIC 84, Procedural Order no. 2, 28 October 1999,
'9 ICSID Case no. ARB/06/11, [2007] IIC 305, Decision on Provisional Measures, 17 August 2007.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
538 Arbitration International, Volume 25 Issue 4

The tribunal proceeded to apply the facts of the case before it to each of the
five required elements and concluded that interim relief was warranted.

(i) Prima facie jurisdiction

Relying on a decision of the International Court of Justice (ICJ),2° the tribunal set
aside Mongolia’s challenges to the jurisdiction of the tribunal by postponing
decision on the issues. The tribunal concluded that the government’s jurisdictional
arguments, (i) failure to comply with notice requirements, and (ii) estoppel
based on settlement negotiations, were matters to be considered as part of the
jurisdictional and merits phase of the proceedings (Interim Order, para. 9).
Finding that the claimants had established prima facie jurisdiction under the
provisions of article 6 of the BIT, the tribunal in theory left open the door that it
might later conclude it was actually without jurisdiction over the dispute.

(a) Prima facie establishment of the case

The tribunal dedicated only two paragraphs of its 91 paragraph order to this
required element. It made no attempt to assess the merits of the claims. To the
contrary, the tribunal concluded that it needed only to decide that the claims
were not, on their face, frivolous. “Io do otherwise would require the Tribunal to
proceed to a determination of the facts and, in practice to a hearing on the merits
of the case, a lengthy and complicated process which would defeat the very
purpose of interim measures’ (Interim Order, para. 9).

(wt) Urgency
The primary evidence upon which the tribunal relied to conclude that the
circumstances were sufficiently urgent to warrant interim relief related to the
impact of the Windfall Profits Tax on the gold mining industry generally, and on
claimant GEM specifically. The tribunal cited statements from the President of
the Mongolian Geologists Association, also a member of the Hural, that 93 gold
mining companies, more than 50 per cent of the previous number of companies
in the industry, had discontinued operations. The tribunal considered evidence of
a proposal to modify the Windfall Profits Tax law as evidence that the
government recognised the ‘critical situation resulting from its legislation’ even
though the proposed changes were not adopted (Interim Order, para. 10). The
proof upon which the tribunal relied was an undated press release submitted to
the tribunal.

The tribunal also considered evidence of the specific impact of the tax on
GEM, concluding that in the then current fiscal conditions, imposition of the

obligation to pay the Windfall Profits Tax immediately would likely result in
GEM’s bankruptcy.

20 Military and Paramilitary Activities In and Against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America), Provisional
Measures, Order of 10 May 1984, [1984] ICJ Rep. 169 at para. 24.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
Time to Evaluate the Standards for Issuance 539

(w) Imminent danger of serious prejudice (necessity)

The tribunal allocated the greatest portion of its analysis to this element of the
Claimants’ burden. Considering significant numbers of ICSID and other
precedents submitted and argued by the parties, the tribunal made a clear
distinction between the Anglo-American concept of irreparable injury and the
concept of irreparable prejudice in international law. Citing with approval K.P.
Berger in his International Economic Arbitration,?! and relying particularly on the
decision in Behring International, Inc. v. Islamic Republic Iranian Air Force,2? the tribunal
adopted the view that ‘irreparable harm’ in international law has a more flexible
meaning and that while the Anglo-American concept of irreparable injury
requires a showing that the injury complained of is not remediable by an award
of damages, the international law standard does not.

The tribunal also relied on article 17A of the UNCITRAL Model Law for the
proposition that ‘[h]arm not adequately reparable by an award of damages is
likely to result if the measure is not ordered, and such harm substantially
outweighs harm that is likely to result to the party against whom the measure is
directed if the measure is granted’.

(v) Proportonality

In balancing the interests of the parties before it, the tribunal acknowledged the
right of a sovereign to enact tax measures and to demand immediate payment of
those taxes. However, the tribunal again relied upon the evidence provided by the
undated press release indicating that the government itself had recognised that
the Windfall Profits Tax was not achieving the objectives intended. After noting
that the government had a legitimate interest in preventing the claimants from
depleting their assets so that an award in the government’s favour would be
uncollectible, the tribunal then proceeded to spht the proverbial baby in half,
ordering the claimants to pay the taxes into an escrow account and periodically
report on the status of its assets, thus placing the tribunal in the unique position as
overseer of the tax collections of Mongolia from its second largest gold mining
enterprise.

IV. REVIEW OF STANDARDS FOR PRELIMINARY
INJUNCTIONS IN THE UNITED STATES AND
OTHER JURISDICTIONS

As noted above, the tribunal in Paushok v. Mongola listed, without reference to
specific authority, the following five standards for issuance of interim measures:

2t K.P. Berger, International Economic Arbitration, Studies in Transnational Economic Law vol. 9 (Kluwer Law and
Taxation Publishers, Deventer/Boston, 1993).
22) Award no. ITM/ITL 52-382-3, 21 June 1985, 8 Iran-US CTR 238 at 276. -

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
540 Arbitration International, Volume 25 Issue 4

(1) prima facie jurisdiction;

(2) prima facie establishment of the case;

(3) urgency;

(4) imminent danger of serious prejudice (necessity);
(5) proportionality.

Preliminary injunctions and temporary restraining orders have been a part of

the remedial toolbox of courts in the United States for many years. In the federal
courts of the United States, the grant or denial of a preliminary injunction is
governed procedurally by Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 65, and rests in
the sound discretion of trial courts which must exercise that discretion in light of
four prerequisites:??

(i) a substantial likelihood that the claimant will prevail on the merits;
(ii) a substantial threat that the claimant will suffer irreparable injury if the
injunction is not granted;
(iu) the threatened injury to the claimant outweighs the threatened harm the
injunction may do to the defendant;
(iv) granting the preliminary injunction will not disserve the public interest.*4

In Spain, the grant or denial of interim equitable relief depends on the

existence of the legal requirements of:?°

(i) fumus boni juris (a prima facie case);
(ii) periculum in mora (appearance of danger from delay of the proceeding);
(iii) sufficiency of guarantee.

In South Africa, the grant or denial of interim equitable relief depends on the

existence of the following prerequisites:76

23

24

25

26

(i) a prima facie right: what is required is proof of facts that establish the
existence of a right in terms of substantive law;

(ii) a well-grounded apprehension of irreparable harm if the interim relief is
not granted and the ultimate relief is eventually granted;

Allison v. Froehlke, 470 F.2d 1123, 1126 (5th Cir. 1971); DiGiorgio v. Causey, 488 F.2d 527 (5th Cir. 1973); Canal
Authority of the State of Florida v. Callaway, 489 F.2d 567 (5th Cir. 1974).

It should be noted that while these four factors will always be considered, federal courts in the United States
may also consider other equities in exercising their sound discretion whether to grant or deny preliminary
injunctive relief. For example, some courts will consider the ‘balance of hardships’, which requires a showing
of ‘sufficiently serious questions going to the merits to make them a fair ground for litigation and a balance
of hardships tipping decidedly toward the party requesting the preliminary relief’. Hypoint Technology, Inc. v.
Hewlett-Packard Co., 869 F.2d 1491 (6th Cir. 1989).

Endesa, SA v. Gas Natural SDG, SA, Madrid Mercantile Court, Trial Number 523/2005, 21 March 2006
Order.

National Council of Societies for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals v. Peter Openshaw, Supreme Court of Appeal of
South Africa, Case Number 462/07, 31 May 2008 Order.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
Time to Evaluate the Standards for Issuance 541

(iil) the balance of convenience favours the granting of an interim interdict;
iv) the applicant has no other satisfactory remedy.
Pp ry y.

As lawyers educated and trained in the United States, the authors bring a
common law approach to the issues framed by requests for interim relief:
However, development of international law is a more complicated process and is
not subject to pure common law traditional analysis and thought. Arbitration
scholar and author, Prof. Jan Paulsson, tantalismgly posed and then answered the
question thusly:

What is the status of awards rendered by ephemeral arbitral tribunals deciding claims of
investors under treaties? Although they are not binding on subsequent tribunals, they are
assuredly read by them. That they may have an influence is evidently believed by advocates
whose pleadings treat them with great attention, as precedents to be invoked, distinguished, or
rejected. That scholars of international law deem awards worthy of sustained attention is equally
evident, and testifies to a perception that they matter. But what — if any — is the dignity, or shall
we say legitimacy, of such awards as instruments susceptible of generating international law? ...

So it is pointless to resist the observation that precedents generate norms of international law.
It is a fact of life before international courts and tribunals. What is more pertinent is to
understand that the influence of international awards and judgments is highly variable. This is
quite unlike the traditional concept of common law systems, where the precedent of the highest
court is binding, no matter how unconvincing it may seem to lower-court Judges, until it is
reversed at the same level. International courts and tribunals, on the other hand, are not part of
a hierarchical system.27

Nonetheless, Paulsson concludes that a special jurisprudence is developing from
the ‘leading awards’ in investment arbitration. The danger inherent in this
situation is that all decisions of all tribunals ‘have in principle equal status as
concerns the potential for normative influence.’2®

Consequently, although it is perfectly permissible for arbitrators serving on
international investment tribunals to exercise ‘free choice’ as respects the leading
awards upon which they choose to rely and how they choose to employ those
precedents, it is equally permissible, and perhaps more important, for
commentators to critically evaluate that reliance and the reasoning process on
which it is based. Whether or not, in doing so, commentators ought to propose
the development of standards they suggest might gain the force of international
law or norm is perhaps dependent upon one’s view of the role to be played by
commentators in the development of international law. It may even be a bit
arrogant. Nonetheless, publication of such proposed standards is certainly not
inappropriate so that some attempt may be made to synthesise a series of awards
that appear only sporadically in the public domain and purport to identify and
claim to rely on other ‘leading awards’ relating to a definable subject.

27 Jan Paulsson, ‘International Arbitration and the Generation of Legal Norms: Treaty Arbitration and
International Law’ in (2006) 3(5) Transnational Dispute Management (December).
28 hid. p. 13.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
542 Arbitration International, Volume 25 Issue 4

V. PROPOSAL FOR NEW STANDARDS FOR INTERIM
MEASURES IN INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION

We propose that tribunals considering applications for issuance of interim
measures in international investment arbitration under both ICSID and
UNCITRAL Rules consider the following standards, understanding that
application of the standards should be flexible and that where the language of the
rules differs, that might have an impact on applicability of the standards to the
facts of any given case:

(1) prima facie determination that the tribunal has jurisdiction over the
dispute pursuant to the relevant agreement;

(2) a strongly arguable case on the merits of the claim(s);

(3) urgency;

(4) imminent danger of serious prejudice if the request for interim measures is
not granted;

(5) proportionality, including a determination that granting the request for
interim measures will not disserve the public interest.

These standards should be applied with a strong presumption against the party
seeking such measures. Interim relief is in fact extraordinary relief that is not to
be granted lightly,29 and as a result an extremely heavy burden should be on the
moving party.2° The authors consider that perhaps the best initial guidance to
tribunals considering requests for interim measures was provided by the US
Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, as follows:?!

First and foremost, we reemphasize the importance of the general requirements for a
preliminary injunction. It is an extraordinary remedy, not available unless the plaintiff carries his
burden of persuasion as to all of the four prerequisites. The primary justification for granting
a preliminary injunction is to preserve the court’s ability to render a meaningful decision after a
trial on the merits.

The claimant’s burden and the extraordinary nature of the relief requested
should not become a mere platitude to precede entry of interim relief where the
tribunal predicts it will ultimately grant the same relief at the conclusion.

(a) Argument and Authority for the Proposed Standards

A simple comparison of the standards employed by the tribunal in Paushok v.
Mongolia with the standards from the United States and the sampling of other
jurisdictions reveals some gaps, some overlap and some conflicts. Analysis of the

29 Paushok v. Mongolia, Interim Order, para. 6; Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Spain, JCSID Case no. ARB/97/7,
[1999] TIC 84, Procedural Order no. 2, 28 October 1999; Occidental Petroleum Corp. v. Ecuador, ICSID Case
no. ARB/06/11, [2007] IIC 305, Decision on Provisional Measures, 17 August 2007.

30 Paushok v. Mongolia, Interim Order, para. 6.

31 Canal Authority, supra n. 23, 489 F-2d at 576.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
Time to Evaluate the Standards for Issuance 543

ways that these standards have been interpreted and applied by courts and by
international arbitral tribunals reveals some deep differences that led to the
proposals by these authors.

(i) Prima facte jurisdiction

The requirement that claimant establish, by adequate proof prior to entry of
interim measures, a prima facie basis for the tribunal to conclude that it has
jurisdiction over the dispute and the parties seems to be the proper standard
to apply at the early stage of international investment arbitration proceedings.
This is rarely an issue in the case of domestic courts since their jurisdiction tends
to be challenged less often than the jurisdiction of international investment
arbitral tribunals. The tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia cited approvingly to the
unanimous?? decision of the ICJ in the highly publicised and controversial case
Military and Paramilitary Activities In and Against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of
America), which appears to strike the right balance:34

[O]n a request for provisional measures the Court need not, before deciding whether or not to
indicate them, finally satisfy itself that it has jurisdiction on the merits of the case, or, as the case
may be, that an objection to jurisdiction is well founded, yet it ought not to indicate such
measures unless the provisions involved by the applicant appear, prima facie, to afford a basis on
which the jurisdiction of the court might be founded.

The tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia appears to have given consideration to the
requirements of the Washington Treaty3+ and the UNCITRAL Rules in arriving
at its conclusion that the claimants established a prima facie basis for determining
that the tribunal possessed jurisdiction to consider the dispute.

There is a significant and growing body of publicly available jurisdictional
awards on the ICSID website that should make the quality of such prima facie
determinations reasonably sound. On the other hand, this body of jurisdictional
awards is providing a number of nations, primarily in South America, with a
basis to threaten withdrawal from the Washington Treaty.*° The authors believe
that the proper rule is the one first enunciated by the ICJ in the Mcaragua case.
Requiring only a prima facie finding of jurisdiction certainly entails some risk that
interim awards might subsequently be reversed based on a later finding of a lack
of jurisdiction, and there are, of course, significant issues that flow from such a
standard. For example, is interlocutory appellate or judicial review of partial
awards without fully developed facts to support the establishment of jurisdiction
desirable? In such instances, should the reviewing authority grant the same

32 The lone dissent of Stephen Schwebel, the US representative on the ICJ Court, did not question the prima
facie standard for establishing jurisdiction as a prerequisite to entry of interim measures.

33 Provisional Measures, Order of 10 May 1984, [1984] ICJ Rep. 169.

34 The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States is
referred to as the Washington Treaty as it was compieted on 18 March 1965 in Washington, DC.

35 On 23 November 2007, the Republic of Ecuador withdrew its agreement to submit disputes arising from
investments in the natural resources sector to ICSID. Other South American nations have done the same.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
544 Arbitration International, Volume 25 Issue 4

deference to the prima facie determination of jurisdiction that the New York
Convention requires when reviewing final awards? If so, is an interim order
subject to similar interlocutory review under ICSID procedures? These and other
potential issues will remain.

Despite the risks involved in basing significant interim relief on a jurisdictional
footing that is only prima facie rather than completely explored and evaluated,
the approach applied by the ICJ in the Mcaragua v. United States case seems to have
stood well the test of time.*6

(u) Strongly arguable case on the merits

The authors disagree with the learned tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia in respect of
the proper measure of likely success on the merits as a factor in determining
whether to grant interim measures. That tribunal asserted that it needed ‘to
decide only that the claims made are not, on their face, frivolous or obviously
outside the competence of the Tribunal’ (Interim Order, para. 9). Whether or not
it came to the correct conclusion in the case before it, this standard introduces far
too much opportunity for inappropriate and premature interference by a panel of
international arbitrators in the public affairs of sovereign nations. Now that this
Interim Order is in the public domain, this loose language should not be relied
upon by other parties or tribunals.

The authors believe that the tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia based this portion
of the decision on faulty legal reasoning from the authorities upon which the
tribunal relied. The tribunal cited two cases for the above quoted proposition of
law. The first case, Victor Pey Casado, President Allende Foundation v. Republique du
Chile,3’ involved requests by both parties for provisional measures, which the
tribunal denied. As regards the second case, Application of the Convention on the
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,** the cited paragraph in fact relates to the
standard for establishment of the jurisdiction of the court and contains the very
same language quoted above from Nicaragua v. United States. Thus, the authority
for such a limited burden of proof as to the merits of the claim at the stage where
the tribunal is considering a request for interim measures appears insubstantial.

Two other authorities cited in the Paushok v. Mongolia Interim Order, Maffezini
and Occidental, contain language that could have caused the tribunal in Paushok v.
Mongolia to adopt such a minimal standard as to the claimant’s burden to establish
the likelihood of success on the merits. In both cases, the request for interim
measures was denied. In Maffezini, an ICSID tribunal denied a request by the
Kingdom of Spain that the tribunal order claimant to post a guarantee or bond

36 The authors noted supra n. 35 that the history of jurisdictional challenges and awards in ICSID proceedings
has spawned threats by member nations to withdraw from ICSID. Whether this backlash represents a
serious threat to the continued viability of ICSID and international investment arbitration remains to be
seen.

37 ICSID Case no. ARB/98/2, [2001] ICC 185, Decision on Provisional Measures, 25 September 2001 at
para. 8.

38 Provisional Measures, Order of 13 September 1993, [1993] IC] Rep. 325 at para. 24.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
Time to Evaluate the Standards for Issuance 545

to ensure payment of costs and expenses should the claimant not prevail. ‘The
Maffezin tribunal wrote:

20. Expectations of success or failure in an arbitration or judicial case are conjectures. Until
this Arbitral Tribunal hands down an award, no one can state with any certainty what its
outcome will be. The meritoriousness of the Claimant’s case will be decided by the Tribunal
based on the law and the evidence presented to it.

21. A determination at this time which may cast a shadow on either party’s ability to present
its case is not acceptable. It would be improper for the Tribunal to pre-judge the Claimant’s
case by recommending provisional remedies of this nature.

The Occidental tribunal addressed this language from the Maffezini procedural
order, which the Republic of Ecuador argued should prevent the grant of
provisional measures against it in the Occidental case. Although the Occidental
tribunal also denied the request for provisional measures presented to it (finding
that the claimants in that case failed to establish a ‘strongly arguable right’ to
the requested relief, specific performance of a natural resources concession
agreement), that tribunal, which included Prof. Stern, imcluded language
unnecessary to the decision, to the effect that when a tribunal is considering the
merits (whether claimant possesses a right) ‘the right to be preserved only has to
be asserted as a theoretically existing right, as opposed to proven to exist in
fact’.39 In another unfortunate passage, the Occidental tribunal returned to the
holding of the ICSID tribunal in Victor Pey Casado, President Allende Foundation v.
Republique du Chile (at para. 46):

For its part, the Tribunal can neither prejudge nor even, to put it correctly, “assume in an
anticipatory fashion’ ... It must therefore reason, at this preliminary stage of the arbitration
process, on the basis not of ‘assumptions’ but of Aypotheses, in particular that by which it may
come to recognize its own jurisdiction on the substance of the case, and in such a case, the
hypothesis whereby the rights that the decision may recognize for one or the other of the parties
in question could be placed in danger or compromised by the absence of provisional measures.
(Emphasis in original)

The Occidental tribunal then went on to add one last bit of unfortunately
imprecise language:

65. What is meant by a theoretically existing right? Clearly, the facts must show an actual
right or legally protected interest, by opposition to a simple interest which does not entail legal
protection. This right or legally protected interest must also potentially form part of the
Claimants’ individual rights and obligations. Thus, the Tribunal must first determine whether or
not the Claimants can theoretically invoke the rights whose protection they now seek. As was
seen earlier, those rights are, first, their alleged right to specific performance of their Block 15
contracts and, second, their alleged right to the non-aggravation of the dispute.

The tribunal in Paushok v. Mongoha reasoned not from the holdings of these
prior decisions, but rather from the above quoted provisions, which in the
common law tradition are dicta. The result of this imprecise ‘common law

39 Occidental, supra n. 29 at 29.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
546 Arbitration International, Volume 25 Issue 4

process’ that is not based on stare decisis is, perhaps not surprisingly, a dangerously
imprecise standard. Building on dicta from some awards and imprecise language
of other awards, the tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia has now concluded that a
tribunal need only decide that the claims made are not, on their face, frivolous or
obviously outside the competence of the tribunal in order to enter interim
measures.

The authors contend that a better standard was actually set forth in the
holding of the Occidental decision on provisional measures. After an exhaustive
analysis of Occidental’s claim for specific performance, that tribunal’s holding
was as follows (at para. 40):

86. In conclusion, it is the Tribunal’s view that the Claimants have not established a strongly
arguable case that there exists a right to specific performance where a natural resources
concession agreement has been terminated or cancelled by a sovereign State. The view of the
Tribunal at this stage of the proceedings is that no such right exists. As a result, the Claimants
have failed to establish that it would be appropriate for the Tribunal to grant a provisional
measure such as the one sought by the Claimants pursuant to their ‘third-party notice’ request.

A ‘strongly arguable case’ on the merits is a more accurate standard to draw
from the very precedents upon which the tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia relied.

Of course, it is not possible to predict what would have been the result in
Paushok v. Mongolia if the tribunal had employed this standard. Because the
authors do not have access to the record before the tribunal, it requires too much
speculation to perform a fair critical analysis of the decision. However, a more
detailed analysis of the merits of the claims under the BIT would presumably
have required a clear position to be taken by Mongolia regarding the status of
both laws that gave rise to the claims and would have required the tribunal to
carefully consider whether a portion of the Claimants’ tax obligation would have
been payable under the previous tax structure (presumably the claimants had
obligations to pay taxes prior to adoption of the Windfall Profits Tax). It would
also have required a careful delineation of the manner in which claimants failed
to comply with the employment requirements of the 2006 Minerals Law.

The authors believe that before the tribunal entered an interim award that
deprived Mongolia, a functioning democracy, of critical tax revenues from one of
the largest mining companies in the country, for an indeterminate length of time,
claimants should have been obligated to prove at least a strongly arguable case.

In Mongolia today, the Hural is engaged in negotiations with Ivanhoe Mines
Mongolia, Inc. over the terms of an Investment Agreement relating to the Oyu
Tolgoi project. The impact such an agreement would have on Mongolia’s mineral
and tax laws is very much a part of the public debate. As recently as 19 March
2009, the Ulan Bator Post, the leading English language newspaper in Mongolia,
published a letter to the editor from the Open Society in Mongolia that was
critical of the Hural for conducting these negotiations in secret. If the tribunal in
Paushok v. Mongolha made a determination, even at the preliminary stage of interim
measures, that the Windfall Profits Tax and the 2006 Mineral Law violate
Mongolia’s BIT with Russia, this would be an extraordinarily valuable piece of

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
Time to Evaluate the Standards for Issuance 547

information for policy-makers in Mongolia to have as they engage in subjects that
are critical to the very future of the country and its people.

In any event, the authors do not believe that international arbitral tribunals
ought to enter such interim measures as suspending the collection of taxes by
sovereign nations without holding the claimant to the requirement that it prove a
strongly arguable case.

(ut) Urgency

Without commenting on the manner in which the tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia
applied the standard of urgency, there seems no question about the requirement
that a claimant seeking interim measures must carry the heavy burden of
establishing to the satisfaction of the tribunal that interim relief is necessary or the
tribunal will find itself unable to fashion an appropriate remedy after final hearing
on the merits is completed.

(ww) Imminent danger of serious preudice if the request for
interim measures 1s not granted

In the authors’ view, the distinguished tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia properly
analysed and encapsulated the appropriate burden on a claimant with respect to
establishing irreparable harm. The tribunal reviewed authorities cited by the
parties and, quoting from UNCITRAL Model Law, article 17A, the tribunal
expressed its view that ‘irreparable harm in international law has a flexible
meaning’. Referring to article 17A, the tribunal noted that the requesting party is
not required to demonstrate irreparable harm but merely that harm not
‘adequately reparable by an award of damages is likely to result if the measure is
not ordered, and such harm substantially outweighs the harm that is likely to result
to the party against whom the measure is directed if the measure is granted’.

Courts in the United States and commentators often assert that irreparable
harm is harm that cannot be remedied by an award of damages. However, this
concept is more appropriately known in the context of common law concepts of
legal and equitable remedies, where the Anglo-American jurisprudence has
developed a requirement that in order for a court to enter final equitable relief, it
must conclude that an award of damages is inadequate to remedy the wrong
done to the claimant.*

The better reasoned decisions in US courts emphasise that the purpose of a
preliminary injunction is to preserve the court’s ability to render a meaningful
decision after a trial on the merits.*! The availability of a remedy in damages may
or may not have a significant impact on the ability of the tribunal to render a
meaningful decision after a trial on the merits, but it should not be determinative

40 Franklin v. Gwinnett County Public Schools, 503 U.S. 60, 76 (1992) (‘fujnder the ordinary convention, the proper
inquiry would be whether monetary damages provided an adequate remedy, and if not, whether equitable
relief would be appropriate’).

4! Canal Authority, supra n. 23, 498 F.2d. 576.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
548 Arbitration International, Volume 25 Issue 4

by itself. The standard employed by the tribunal in Paushok v. Mongoha to evaluate
the urgency of the need for interim relief seems appropriate.

(v) Proportionalty, including a determination that granting interm measures will
not disserve the public interest

The need for a court or arbitral tribunal to balance the interests of the parties
before granting interim measures does not seem to be controversial. Nearly every
jurisdiction surveyed by the authors includes such a requirement. In the United
States, however, courts are specifically required not only to balance the interests
of the parties before the court, but also to consider and determine that entry of a
preliminary injunction will not disserve the public interest. The very nature of
international investment arbitration, where the respondent is always a sovereign
nation, should require that consideration of the public interest be mandated
before interim relief is granted. This 1s done routinely by courts in the United
States and, if international arbitration tribunals are going to maintain their
legitimacy, they must admit that they are inherently weighing in on the public
interest of the respondents before them.

For example, in evaluating the proportionality of its interim measures, the
tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia noted that Mongolia had ‘recognized that the WPT
Law was not achieving the objectives it had in mind when it was adopted in
2006’. The tribunal concluded that this was ‘quite apparent in its attempts, both
in 2007 and 2008, to repeal that law and to replace it with a much more modest
taxation regime’. One might ask whether the fact that the attempts to repeal the
law failed made it ‘quite apparent’ that the majority of the elected representatives
in the Hural thought the law was working as planned or that regardless of
whether it was working as planned, it was nonetheless in the best interests of the
people of Mongolia. On the other hand, if a distinguished panel of international
arbitrators were to conclude that application of the Windfall Profits Tax and the
Mineral Law of 2006 to mining enterprises like those who are the claimants in
Paushok v. Mongolia violated Mongolia’s BIT obligations with other nations, that
might in turn have a significant impact on the policy discourse within Mongolia.

It may be thought revolutionary for international arbitrators to openly
acknowledge that they should consider the public interest as they decide whether
to enter interim measures in investment arbitration, but there is growing support
for the proposition that there is an important place for consideration of public
policy issues in investment treaty disputes. Professor Charles Brower II, in a soon
to be published article,t? argues persuasively that international investment
arbitral tribunals must openly consider sticky public policy issues involved in the
respondent countries before them. Debunking one commonly held reason for
limiting the role of investment arbitral tribunals, Prof. Brower writes:

42 Charles Brower, II, ‘Obstacles and Pathways to Consideration of the Public Interest in Investment Treaty
Disputes’ in (2008-09) Int’l Inv. L & Pol’y YB (Oxford University Press, June 2009).
43 Ibid. pp. 367-368 (citations omitted).

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
Time to Evaluate the Standards for Issuance 549

As traditionally understood, investment treaties and investment arbitration represent efforts to
depoliticize investment disputes. Charitably construed, this means the establishment of agreed
principles regarding the treatment of foreign investment, as well as the removal of investment
disputes from the politically charged process of state-to-state adjudication. Less charitably,
depoliticization means the establishment of a legal regime empowering foreign investors to
‘resist the forces of change often demanded by the political and economic life in host countries’.
In other words, investment arbitration represents a process specifically designed to exclude the
potential for troublesome arguments regarding the public interest.

Although it may enjoy a measure of historical accuracy, this view only fuels mainstream
concern that investment treaties subvert the democratic process. Because this position tends to
invite backlash, because investment treaties are not suicide pacts, and because it makes no sense
to ignore the issues that have become preoccupations for host countries, one should not see
discussion of the public interest as incompatible with the goal of depoliticization. To the
contrary, consideration of the public interest may diminish politicization by refuting claims that
investment treaties constitute a threat to democratic governance.

Professor Brower goes on to propose that reference to customary rules on
treaty interpretation codified in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
may provide a pathway for international investment tribunals to incorporate
‘norms and values that serve the common good’, rather than limiting the inquiry
to the ‘narrow interests of particular groups’.*

The authors agree that it is preferable to openly acknowledge that the inquiry
includes norms and values that serve the common good, so that the parties are
able to offer evidence and argument on the subject and the citizens of the
respondent nation can know when the legislative (or judicial or executive) actions
of their government have been deemed to violate their treaty obligations. One
cannot honestly doubt that arbitrators in investment arbitration cases are already
making determinations of what is in the public interest of respondent nations,
whether affirmatively or by negative implication when they enter interim
measures over the objection of those very respondents.

The tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia wrote as follows, with respect to the public
interest of Mongolia and its legislative authority:

83. Clearly, and quite understandably so, Respondent sees that it is in its own interest that its
second largest gold producer should continue its operations. A sudden collapse of GEM would
put Respondent in a situation where it would, most likely, be unable to realize a large share of
the amount owing to it under the WPT Law and some considerable time could elapse before it
could find another investor willing to restart gold production on the relevant properties, unless a
new fiscal regime would have been legislated — an eventuality which, considering the 2007
experience, cannot be guaranteed.

84. If Respondent were to prevail, it would be in a position to obtain payment of the full
amount owing to it, specially taking into account the security in favor of Respondent to be
provided by Claimants according to directions further issued under this Order. If, on the other
hand, Claimants were to prevail, Respondent would probably face a claim for lower damages
than if GEM’s activities had been terminated; this is not an insignificant fact, considering
Respondent’s tight budgetary constraints.

4 Ibid. pp. 372-373.
45 Interim Order, para. 15 (emphasis added).

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
550 Arbitration International, Volume 25 Issue 4

To most people involved in international mvestment arbitration, these
observations by the distinguished tribunal may seem so obvious as to be beyond
debate and not truly an analysis of the impact its Interim Order would have on
the public interest of Mongoha and its citizens. To the rest of the world,
particularly to executive and legislative leaders of governments, they might well
appear to be undemocratic and a usurpation of the sovereign authority of
Mongolia. Simply noting that the funds in the escrow account will be available to
aid in collection of the taxes should the respondent prevail does not relieve these
observations of their impact on the public interest.

Some argue that the confidentiality of the arbitration process precludes such
open consideration of the respondent host country’s public interest. One of the
authors has previously argued that this presumption of confidentiality must be
abandoned in the case of international investment arbitration and that the
presumption of confidentiality should be reversed even in international
commercial arbitration. In the case of investment arbitration, the presumption
of confidentiality places the arbitral representatives of the respondent govern-
ment in the untenable position of having to choose between respecting the
confidentiality of the proceedings or placing the decisions of international
investment tribunals into the public discourse within their own countries. As a
practical matter it is impossible for the outcomes to remain confidential, but the
authors assert that permitting the parties to such disputes the right to publish not
only the results but also the submissions of the parties so that they are freely
accessible would help encourage better government decision-making, improve the
quality of the process and those engaged in it and, in some instances, might help
to prevent corrupt or incompetent government.

If international arbitral tribunals are going to enter interim measures against
sovereign nations involving the sovereign’s most essential authority, such as the
authority to tax, then they should openly acknowledge that they are passing
judgment on matters at the heart of the public interest and subject their
judgments to public scrutiny. In the case of interim measures, this is particularly
important because of the inherently transitory nature of arbitration tribunals and
the fact that such interim measures are, by definition, entered without the full
panoply of procedural and substantive rights assured by the applicable treaties,
laws and rules of procedure.

Rarely discussed, but inherent always in arbitration, is the fact that the tribunal
is constituted for a single dispute and paid by the parties before it in that dispute.
It would be disastrous if international arbitrators issued an interim award such as
the tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia and thereafter found themselves in the position
of not being paid for their service as arbitrators. One can imagine the impact on
the integrity of international investment arbitration if, after an interim award
such as the one in Paushok v. Mongola, an ad hoc tribunal was subsequently not
paid for its services and it was in a position of supervision over a fund of tax

46 See Matthews, supra n. 6 at p. 14.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
Time to Evaluate the Standards for Issuance 551

revenues that it had created by means of the interim measures. The distinguished
tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia would, of course, not permit itself to look at such
funds in guarantee of their compensation, but the mere potential existence of
such a dilemma compels the conclusion that international investment arbitral
tribunals must openly consider the public interest(s) involved in any request for
interim measures in a case before them, and must do so transparently.

(b) Other Standards that Might be Considered

Some jurisdictions require the posting of adequate security by the party seeking
interim relief as a condition to granting the relief. Although not specifically listing
it as one criterion it considered, the tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia was clearly
influenced by the need to make certain there was adequate security to protect
both parties as it fashioned the complicated escrow procedures. As noted above,
in Spain the sufficiency of a guarantee is one of the required elements a court
must consider in determining whether to grant preliminary relief.*’

In the United States, where the laws generally do not require claimants to post
security for costs or fees as a prerequisite for filing and pursuing claims, the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure nonetheless require the posting of adequate
security in an amount that the court considers proper to pay the ‘costs and
damages sustained by any party found to have been wrongfully enjoined or
restrained’.*8 Rule 65 distinguishes between preliminary injunctive relief granted
after notice and a hearing, and temporary relief granted without notice and a
hearing. In the case of a temporary restraining order without notice, the rule
strictly details the contents and specific findings upon which such an order may
be entered and requires that it be of very short duration, giving the party against
whom it is issued the right to a hearing on very short application. However, in
both cases, rule 65 requires the posting of security as a condition to issuance of an
order.

It may be premature to develop such detailed procedural requirements
governing the grant of interim relief in international investment arbitration, but
one bit of history may be predictive of the course that interim awards in
international investment arbitration may take. For many years, US courts found
that in evaluating applications for preliminary injunctive relief, the outcome of
that motion was so likely to dictate the outcome of the case that many judges
would simply consolidate the preliminary proceedings with a final hearing on the
merits and treat them at the same time. This may be counterintuitive, since the
initial idea of preliminary relief is that it must be granted quickly to avoid
prejudice. Nonetheless, many courts simply concluded that if the emergency was
sufficient to warrant interim relief, it was also sufficient to warrant a fast track
procedure for final hearing on the merits. As this procedure grew in popularity,
rule 65 was amended and subsection (a)(2) was added to specifically authorise the

47 Endesa, SA, supra n. 25.
48 Fed. R. Civ, P. 65.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
552 Arbitration International, Volume 25 Issue 4

court to advance the trial on the merits and consolidate it with a hearing on a
motion for preliminary injunction.

VI. CONCLUSION

International investment arbitrators have been given awesome power to judge the
decisions of sovereign nations and enter awards against them, subjecting national
treasuries to collection of their awards. They are given the power to consider and
enter interim measures in proceedings where the parties have not yet been
afforded the full panoply of due process guaranteed by the rules and laws
implementing international arbitration.

The authors are well aware that these proposals for standards to be employed
by international investment arbitral tribunals when they are asked to award
interim measures will be controversial in some ways. There is certainly room for
significant debate about the proposals set forth in this article and there is no
existing procedural way for them to become formal international norms. The
authors nonetheless hope that this article will prompt debate and that it will cause
other tribunals and commentators to question whether there is in actuality a set
of ‘internationally recognised ... standards to be met before a tribunal will issue
an order in support of interim measures’.

6L0Z YEW ZO UO JEsn OWT / Ayissaalun Uaple Aq GgZ790Z/6ZS/P/ST/OBNSqe-9|oINe/UONeujIqJe/LUoo "dno‘olwepese//:sdyy Wo papeojumog
