Power to Order Provisional Measures

I Introduction

When presented with an application for interim relief, an international
court or tribunal may take into account a number of factors in decid-
ing whether such relief should be granted. These may be divided into
three broad categories. The first concerns antecedent questions that must
be answered affirmatively before further inquiries can be entered into:
questions of the authority to award provisional measures, of consent
to jurisdiction, and of admissibility. The second concerns the purpose
of provisional measures, and the existence and relevance of the rights
sought to be protected. The third addresses a set of circumstances slightly
more open-ended and fact-sensitive in character, namely whether a fail-
ure to award interim relief would result in consequences too dire to be
tolerated — the criteria of ‘irreparable’ prejudice and urgency. The present
chapter addresses the first of these categories; the second (the purpose of
provisional measures) is discussed in Chapter 5, the third (questions of
urgency and ‘irreparability’) in Chapter 6.

Questions of jurisdiction — and to a lesser extent, admissibility — have
preoccupied provisional measures jurisprudence since the inauguration
of the International Court of Justice. As was noted by the dissenting Judges
Winiarski and Badawi Pasha in Anglo-Iranian Oil, provisional measures
in international law ‘are exceptional in character to an even greater extent
then they are in municipal law and as such ‘may easily be considered
a scarcely tolerable interference in the affairs of a sovereign state’! To
combat any perception of institutional overreach, the international courts
and tribunals considered in this book—led toa great extent by the PCY and
ICJ —have developed a series of preconditions to the award of interim relief
that are intrinsically connected to the consensual character of jurisdiction

' Anglo-Iranian Oil (Iran v UR), Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports 1951 p 89, 97 (Judges
Winiarski and Badawi Pasha, diss).

133

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316410813.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae tN wok at
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

134 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

in international law. At the same time, however, these factors have been
balanced against the fact that a request for provisional measures often
precludes any searching inquiry as to either the jurisdiction of the tribunal
or the merits of the dispute.

II Provisional Measures as Incidental Proceedings

Provisional measures proceedings are inherently incidental — “engrafted
onto a substantive case’ — and share this characteristic with preliminary
objections, third party applications for intervention and counterclaims.°
As a Chamber of the ICJ has said:

Incidental proceedings by definition must be those which are incidental
to a case which is already before the Court or Chamber. An incidental
proceeding cannot be one which transforms the case into a different case
with different parties.’

Incidental proceedings share a number of common features.? With the
exception of decisions on jurisdiction and admissibility (which take the
form of judgments or awards) incidental proceedings are concluded
by way of procedural order or, unusually, by way of interim award.°

2 Robert Kolb, The International Court of Justice (Oxford: Hart, 2013) 621-2.
> See Questions Relating to the Seizure and Detention of Certain Documents and Data (Timor-
Leste v Australia), ICJ, Order of 3 March 2014, $6 (Judge Greenwood, diss). Further:
V S Mani, International Adjudication: Procedural Aspects (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff,
1980) 283; Shabtai Rosenne, 2 The Law and Practice of the International Court 1920-
2005 (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 4th edn, 2006) 578-9; Hugh Thirlway, 1 The Law
and Procedure of the International Court of Justice: Fifty Years of Jurisprudence (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2013) 928. Some early commentators argued that the category
also concerned proceedings for interpretation or revision, although the modern practice
of the ICJ has been formally to treat such actions as entirely new proceedings: Manley O
Hudson, The Permanent Court of International Justice, 1920-1942 (New York: MacMillan,
1943) 408.
Land, Island and Maritime Frontier Dispute (El Salvador/Honduras), Application to Inter-
vene, ICJ Reports 1990 p 92, 134.
Bernard H Oxman, ‘Jurisdiction and the Power to Indicate Provisional Measures, in L F
Damrosch, The International Court of Justice at a Crossroads (Dobbs Ferry, NY: Transna-
tional Publishers, 1987) 323, 333-4; Shabtai Rosenne, Provisional Measures in International
Law: The International Court of Justice and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005) 9-10; Rosenne, 2 Law and Practice, 578-84; ICSID
Commentary, 774—5.
© See e.g. 1976 UNCITRAL Rules, Rule 26(2). Interim awards are usually utilized in
the investor-state arbitration context so as to render a provisional measure enforceable
under the New York Convention, Art ITI: Caline Mouawad and Elizabeth Silbert, ‘A Guide to

a

wi

SOFETST64T 9S 7 5.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae rt eN wnat
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

PROVISIONAL MEASURES AS INCIDENTAL PROCEEDINGS 135

Furthermore, the exercise of incidental powers by the court or tribunal
does not formally require the consent of the parties — such consent, rather,
is implicit in a state’s overall accession to the existence and functioning
of the relevant court and tribunal, as well as its consent to the capacity of
that court or tribunal to decide the dispute on the merits. When issued in
this way, provisional measures do not constitute the final disposition of a
case and indeed are often expressed to be without prejudice to either the
parties’ submissions or the court or tribunal’s conclusions on the merits.’
Accordingly, they are without res judicata effect.

As such, the basal requirement for the grant of a request for provisional
measures is that the court or tribunal in question be seised of a case with
respect to which judgment is pending.® This assertion is confirmed by
the wording of Article 41(2) of the ICJ Statute, which makes reference
to actions taken ‘[p]ending resolution of the final decision’? Similarly,
UNCLOS Article 290(1) frames the question in conditional terms, open-
ing with the words ‘[i]f a dispute has been duly submitted to a court or
tribunal’! Other international courts and tribunals have adopted word-
ing that contemplates the existence of a primary dispute separate from
a request for interim relief.'! In all cases, the language deployed is only

Interim Measures in Investor-State Arbitration’ (2013) 29 Arb Inf1381, 417-23. Where a
court or tribunal has a discretion to issue relief as either an order or interim award, it may
be subsequent to issuing relief convert the former into the latter so as to maximize the
enforcement options available to the beneficiary: see e.g. Chevron Corporation and Texaco
Petroleum Corporation v Ecuador, PCA Case No 2009-23 (First Interim Award on Interim
Measures, 25 January 2012) 16-17.

7 Mani, International Adjudication, 285-6. See e.g. Fisheries Jurisdiction (UK v Iceland),
Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports 1972 p 12, 16; Fisheries Jurisdiction (Germany v Iceland),
Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports 1972 p 31, 34:

Whereas the decision given in the course of the present proceedings in no way pre-
judges the question of the jurisdiction of the Court to deal with the merits of the case
or any questions relating to the merits themselves and leaves unaffected the right of
the Respondent to submit arguments against such jurisdiction or in respect of such
merits [... ]

Cf. the various separate opinions of Judge Cancado Trindade, who has argued for a
‘conceptually [... ] autonomous legal regime of provisional measures of protection’: see
e.g. Certain Documents and Data, ICJ, Order of 3 March 2014, $59-62 (Judge Cangado
Trindade).

Further: ICJ Rules, Art 73(1). ‘© Further: ITLOS Rules, Art 89(1).

See e.g. ICSID Rules, Rule 39 (‘At any time after the institution of the proceeding’); ICSID
(AF) Rules, Art 46 (‘either party may at any time during the proceeding’); 1976 UNCITRAL
Rules, Art 26(1) (‘the arbitral tribunal may take any interim measures it deems necessary
in respect of the subject matter of the dispute’); 2010 UNCITRAL Rules Art 26(2) (‘An
interim measure is any temporary measure by which, at any time prior to the issuance

a
PrP wO

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae rt eN wnat
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

136 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

capable of being given meaning if interim relief is dependent on the court
or tribunal already being seised.”

This point has not been the subject of an express judicial
pronouncement,’* but parties tend automatically to ensure that any
request for interim relief is at the very least made alongside an appli-
cation for final relief — even where the raison d’étre of that application
is the request for provisional measures itself.‘ The alternative would
be to convert a court or tribunal’s capacity to award interim relief into
an unlimited grant of jurisdiction inconsistent with the consent-based
character of international dispute settlement.'”

III Legal Source of the Power to Order Provisional Measures
A Provisional Measures as a General Principle of International Law

The character of provisional measures proceedings as incidental to a
primary action is relatively uncontroversial. Less certain is the source
of the capacity to award provisional measures and, more particularly,
whether it is possible for an international court or tribunal to issue
interim relief without the express authorization of the parties. However,
given its widespread use in international law and the plethora of domes-
tic law analogies readily identifiable,!° it may be argued that the power
to order provisional measures constitutes a general principle of interna-
tional law within the meaning of Article 38(1)(c) of the ICJ Statute,'” and
is therefore generally available to adjudicators even in the absence of an
express power — an argument made at length by Cheng.'* A number of

of the award by which the dispute is finally decided’); 2012 PCA Rules, Art 26(2) (‘An
interim measure is any temporary measure by which, at any time prior to the issuance of
the award by which the dispute is finally decided’).

2 Kolb, International Court, 622.

5 Cf. Legal Status of South-Eastern Greenland (Denmark v Norway) (1932) PCIJ Ser A/B
No 48, 283-4; Aegean Sea Continental Shelf (Greece v Turkey), Provisional Measures, ICJ
Reports 1976 p 3, 15 (President Jimenez de Aréchaga).

4 See Chapter 9, §II. Kolb, International Court, 622. ‘© See Chapter 2, SII.B.

7 Generally: Rudiger Wolfrum ‘Sources of International Law, MPEPIL (2011) §§33-9; Alain

Pellet, ‘Article 38, ICJ Commentary, 731, 832-41.

Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law as Applied by International Courts and Tribunals

(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1953) 267-74. See also Mani, International

Adjudication, 277; Lawrence Collins, ‘Provisional and Protective Measures in Interna-

tional Litigation’ (1992) 234 Hague Recueil 9, 23-4, 214-15; “Discussion, in R Bernhardt

(ed), Interim Measures Indicated by International Courts and Tribunals (Berlin: Springer-

Verlag, 1994) 117, 127-9 (Mosler), 137-9 (Jacobs), 140 (Bernhardt); Chester Brown, A

Common Law of International Adjudication (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007) 126-7.

Dumbauld earlier identified provisional measures as a general principle but stopped short

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae rt eN wnat
via ae fF ie ;
LIDS VOL ora randa s

LEGAL SOURCE OF THE POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES 137

factors support this assertion. In the first place, in the modern era of
dispute settlement, it is widely accepted that international courts and
tribunals require a broad power to regulate their proceedings. For this
reason, it is common for the constituent instruments of such courts
or tribunals to include the authority to award interim relief. The most
prominent example of this is Article 41 of the ICJ Statute, and amongst
the judicial bodies under consideration here, one may also point to UNC-
LOS Article 290, Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and NAFTA Article
1134 as exemplifying this paradigm, as do a number of other stand-alone
agreements that exist to confer jurisdiction on another dispute resolu-
tion body.'? Another approach is for the power to grant interim relief
to be included in a preexisting set of procedural rules to be drafted or
nominated by the parties, as is the case with Article 26 of the 1976 and
2010 UNCITRAL Rules, as well as Article 26 of the PCA Arbitration
Rules. A related case is where the parties agree to base the procedure of
a dispute settlement body on an existing set of rules containing a pro-
visional measures procedure, and then leave final settlement of the rules
to the tribunal itself, as was the case with both the Iran—US Claims Tri-
bunal (based on the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules”’) and the Ethiopia—Eritrea
Claims Commission (based on the PCA Optional Rules).”' In all cases,
the court or tribunal’s capacity to award interim relief has been gener-
ated by the express (or at least strongly implied) consent of the parties,
but may be said more broadly to reflect an extant general principle of
law.

More complicated is the situation in which a court or tribunal is given
a general competence to define its own proceedings, and then arrogates
unto itself the power to award interim relief. The most prominent example
is the European Court of Human Rights, which has used its general
power under ECHR Article 25(d) to supplement its procedural framework

of arguing for an automatic competence of international courts and tribunals to order
them: Edward Dumbauld, Interim Measures of Protection in International Controversies
(The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1932) 180.

See e.g. the General Act for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, 26 September
1928, 93 UNTS 343, Art 33; American Treaty of Pacific Settlement (Pact of Bogata), 30
April 1948, 30 UNTS 55, Art XVI; European Convention for the Peaceful Settlement of
Disputes, 29 April 1957, 320 UNTS 243, Art 21.

Declaration of the Government of the Democratic and Popular Government of Algeria
Concerning the Settlement of Claims by the Government of the United States of America
and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran (Claims Settlement Declaration), 19
January 1981, 20 ILM 1981, Art III(2).

Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and
the Government of the State of Eritrea, 12 December 2000, 40 ILM 260, Art 5(7).

20

2

rae

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae tN wok at
via ae fF ie ;
LIDS VOL ora randa s

138 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

sua sponte to introduce the capacity to order provisional measures.”
An older example arises in the context of the inter-war mixed arbitral
tribunals,**> many of which undertook a similar exercise pursuant to a
general grant of procedural creativity in the 1919 Treaty of Versailles**
and other postwar agreements. Again, these examples may be said to
reflect the tribunal in question giving form to a general principle of
international law through its power to develop its own procedure — though
naturally it cannot go beyond the scope of its constituent instrument in so
doing.

A third variation is where an international court or tribunal orders
interim relief without reference to any provision in its constitutive instru-
ment or its procedural rules. An early example of this occurred in the
order issued by the tribunal assembled according to the terms of the 1906
Treaty of Corinto, which purported to derive its authority from ‘its prin-
cipal duty is to see that the judgment it is going to deliver should become
effective.”? Reference might also be made in this respect to the early
practice of the UN Administrative Tribunals and the International Labor
Organization.”° A further example was the Trail Smelter arbitration, in
which the Tribunal established a “temporary regime’ that safeguarded the
rights subject to litigation notwithstanding the absence of such a power
in the Tribunal’s constitutive instrument.””

Certain aspects of the power to order provisional measures have been
identified as a general principle of international law in the decisions of
international courts and tribunals. The PCIJ in Electricity Company made
reference to ‘the principle universally accepted by international tribunals
[...] to the effect that the parties to the case must abstain from any
measure capable of exercising a prejudicial effect in regard to the execu-

tion of the decision to be given;”* thereby identifying measures for the

2 See 2014 Rules of the European Court of Human Rights, Rule 39. On the introduction
of the power, see Rudolph Bernhard, ‘Interim Measures of Protection under the Euro-
pean Convention on Human Rights’, in R Bernhard (ed), Interim Measures Indicated by
International Courts (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1994) 95, 97-100.

°3 See Chapter 2, SIIB. 74: 28 June 1919, 225 CTS 188, Art 304(d).

?5 See Chapter 2, SITI.A.1. Further: Dumbauld, Interim Measures, 92-5.

6 Karin Oellers-Frahm, Die einstweilige Anordnung in der internationalen Gerichtsbarkeit

(Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1975) 127ff.

Trail Smelter (US/Canada) (1938) 3 RIAA 1911, 1934-7.

Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgaria (Belgium v Bulgaria) (1939) PCIJ Ser A/B No

79, 199. See also LaGrand (Germany v US), ICJ Reports 2001 p 466, 503. In the ICSID

context, the Tribunal in Amco Asia Corporation v Indonesia, Provisional Measures (1983) 1

ICSID Reports 410, 412 made reference to the ‘good, practical rule’ of non-aggravation of

the dispute. See also the similar decision of the Rennes Cour d’Appel in Guinea v Atlantic

Triton Company (1984) 3 ICSID Reports 3, 5-6.

2
2

Co ss)

SOFETST64T 9S 7 5.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae rt eN wnat
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

LEGAL SOURCE OF THE POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES 139

non-escalation of a dispute as reflecting a general principle of interna-
tional law. As for the power to issue provisional measures protecting rights
pendente lite, individual opinions within the IC] have identified a similar
general principle,”” and furthermore, the Court’s finding in Pulp Mills
that the capacity to order measures for non-escalation is dependent on
the power to award measures for the protection of litigated rights tends
to indicate that it at least considers the two species of measure to derive
from the same source.*”

B_ Provisional Measures as an Inherent Power of International Courts
and Tribunals

Another argument for the source of the power to award interim relief
is that it is but one facet of an international court or tribunal’s inher-
ent power to regulate its jurisdiction. This view was expressed by Judge
Fitzmaurice in Northern Cameroons:

Although much of this [ ... ] incidental jurisdiction is specifically provided
for in the Court’s Statute, or in the Rules of Court which the Statute
empowers the Court to make, it is really an inherent jurisdiction, the
power to exercise which is a necessary condition of the Court — or of any
court of law — being able to function at all.*!

On this view, the inherent powers of international courts and tribunals
arise from their judicial character, with parties who accede to the juris-
diction of such a body assumed also to accede to the potential exercise of
certain implied powers deployed in order to guarantee the integrity of the
judicial process.** As such, the ICJ’s activity under Article 41 of its Statute

29
30

See e.g. Aegean Sea, ICJ Reports 1976 p 3, 15-16 (President Jiménez de Arechaga).

Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentina v Uruguay), Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports
2007 p 3, 16; cf. ibid, 21 (Judge Buergenthal). Further: Paolo Palchetti, “The Power of the
International Court of Justice to Indicate Provisional Measures to Prevent the Aggravation
of a Dispute’ (2008) 21 LJIL 623; Chapter 5.

Northern Cameroons (Cameroon v UK), Preliminary Objections, ICJ Reports 1963 p 15,
103 (Judge Fitzmaurice); See also: Nuclear Tests (Australia v France), IC] Reports 1974
p 253, 259-60; Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v France), ICJ Reports 1974 p 457, 463; Legality
of the Use of Force (Serbia and Montenegro v UK), Preliminary Objections, ICJ Reports
2004 p 1307, 1361-2 (Judge Higgins). Further: Dinah Shelton, ‘Form, Function and the
Powers of International Courts’ (2009) 9 CJIL 537, 548-50.

Gerald Fitzmaurice, 2 The Law and Procedure of the International Court of Justice (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986) 533, 770-1; Elihu Lauterpacht, “Partial” Judg-
ments and the Inherent Jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice’, in V Lowe and
M Fitzmaurice (eds), Fifty Years of the International Court of Justice: Essays in Honour of
Sir Robert Jennings (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996) 465, 476-83; Paola
Gaeta, ‘Inherent Powers of International Courts and Tribunals, in L C Vohrah et al. (eds),

3

aa

32

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae rt eN wnat
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

140 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

does no more than ‘in effect give life and blood to a rule that already exists
in principle.*’ Fitzmaurice extended this proposition further still arguing
‘if there is ever a case at all for conferring this faculty expressly on an
international tribunal (be it the [ICJ] or another), there is automatically
a case for regarding all international tribunals as inherently invested with
it.

The ILC had the opportunity to deal with this question in the course
of its early work on arbitral procedure.*? Discussing Draft Article 26
(concerning provisional measures) of the Commission’s proposed code
of arbitral procedural, Jaroslav Zourek (Czechoslovakia) put forward the
argument that as the powers of an international arbitral tribunal were
dependent on the will of the parties, a tribunal could neither (a) award
provisional measures absent an express power to do so, or (b) award
provisional measures proprio motu. He secured the agreement of F I
Kozhevnikov (USSR), but did not carry the remainder of the Commission,
which rejected his proposal to insert wording supporting his views into
the draft by a margin of 10 to 2.*°

Reasoning such as that propounded by Fitzmaurice has been adopted
by, inter alia, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, which in
Velasquez Rodriguez awarded interim relief on the basis of ‘Articles 63(2),
33 and 62(3) of the American Convention on Human Rights, Articles
1 and 2 of the Statute of the Court and Article 23 of the Rules of

Man’s Inhumanity to Man: Essays on International Law in Honour of Antonio Cassese(The
Hague: Kluwer Law International, 2003) 353; Rosenne, 2 Law and Practice, 579-84; Brown,
Common Law, 55-81; Shelton, “Form, Function and the Powers, 548-50; Brown, ‘Inherent
Powers in International Adjudication, in C P R Romano, K J Alter and Y Shany (eds), The
Oxford Handbook of International Adjudication (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014)
828.
Edvard Hambro, “The Binding Character of the Provisional Measures of Protection Indi-
cated by the International Court of Justice’, in W Schatzel and H J Schlochauer (eds),
Rechtsfragen der Internationalen Organisation — Festschrift fiir Hans Wehberg zu seinem
70 Geburtstag (Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann, 1956) 152, 167. The ICJ has
made a similar pronouncement with respect to its ability to determine its own jurisdiction
(kompetenz-kompetenz): Nottebohm (Liechtenstein v Guatemala), Preliminary Objections,
ICJ Reports 1953 p 111, 119.
Fitzmaurice, 2 Law and Procedure, 542. See also Hudson, Permanent Court, 426; Jerome
B Elkind, Interim Protection: A Functional Approach (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981)
162-3. The argument appears to have been advanced first by Hans Gerd Niemeyer,
Einstweilige Verfiigungen des Weltgerichtshofs, ihr Wesen und ihre Grenzen (Leipzig: R
Noske, 1932) 11-16, 23-4.
°° Further: United Nations, 1 The Work of the International Law Commission (New York:
United Nations, 8th edn, 2012) 134-7.
°° ILC Ybk 1952/1, 65-6.

33

34

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae rt eN wnat
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

LEGAL SOURCE OF THE POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES 141

Procedure and its character as a judicial body and the powers which
derive therefrom’.*” In the context of ICSID, the Tribunal in Biwater Gauff
v Tanzania observed that:

It is now settled in both treaty and international commercial arbitration
that an arbitral tribunal is entitled to direct the parties not to take any
step that might (1) harm or prejudice the integrity of proceedings, or (2)
aggravate or extend the dispute. Both may be seen as a particular type
of provisional measure [...] or simply as a facet of the tribunal’s overall
procedural powers and its responsibility for its own process.*®

Although it may be agreed that such inherent powers exist within the law
and practice of international courts and tribunals, commentators have
lamented the failure of these bodies to identify their legal source with
consistency and precision.*? In the case of provisional measures, this is
exacerbated by the fact that most international courts and tribunals are
expressly granted the power to award interim relief, and naturally pre-
fer to rely on that power so as to avoid controversy. One hypothesis is
that inherent powers are again merely a reflection of general principles
of international law,*° and certainly the power to order provisional mea-
sures would appear to fit within this model. Other theories take a more
elemental stance, and argue that the power emerges from the need of
international courts and tribunals to fulfill the mandate granted in their
constitutive instruments*! — an expression of the need for ‘effectiveness’
in international jurisdiction.”

>” Velasquez Rodriguez (1988) 95 ILR 259, 268.

38 Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v Tanzania, ICSID Case No ARB/05/22 (Procedural Order
No 3, 29 September 2006) $135 (emphasis added). See also and earlier E-Systems Inc v
Tran (1983) 2 Iran—US CTR 51, 57.

°° Gaeta, ‘Inherent Powers’ 354—5, 358-61; Brown, Common Law, 66-71.

4° Gaeta, ‘Inherent Powers’, 355; Brown, Common Law, 67-9. As such, scholars tend to

conflate the two without feeling the need to discuss any potential distinction: see e.g.

Collins, ‘Provisional and Protective Measures’ 214-16; Chittharanjan F Amerasinghe,

Jurisdiction of International Courts and Tribunals (The Hague: Kluwer, 2003) 347-8; Karin

Oellers-Frahm, ‘Expanding the Competence to Issue Provisional Measures — Strengthening

the International Judicial Function’ (2011) 12 German LJ 1279, 12824.

Alexander Orakhelashvili, ‘Questions of International Judicial Jurisdiction in the LaGrand

Case’ (2002) 15 LJIL 105, 107-8, 113-14; Gaeta, ‘Inherent Powers, 364—8; Brown, Common

Law, 71; Rudiger Wolfrum, ‘Interim (Provisional) Measures of Protection’, in R Wolfrum

(gen ed), Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law (Oxford: Oxford University

Press, online edn, 2006) $5; Oellers-Frahm, ‘Expanding the Competence’, 1283.

® Hersch Lauterpacht, The Development of International Law by the International Court
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1958) 243-56.

4

aan

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae TaN eat
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

142 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

C Provisional Measures as an Express Mandate

In a purely functional sense, a conceptualization of the power
to order provisional measures as either a general principle of
international law or an inherent power of an international court or tri-
bunal leads to the same result — the capacity to grant interim relief even
in the absence of the parties’ express consent. Other scholars, however,
argue that provisional measures can only ever be awarded pursuant to
the express mandate of the parties. Insofar as general principles of law
are concerned, the argument runs, a court or tribunal cannot obtain a
jurisdictional power from a general principle, but only from the consent
of the parties.** Similar objections have been made with respect to the
view that international courts and tribunals possess an inherent power to
award provisional measures. If some powers are included and others not,
then this is suggestive of an intention to omit: expressio unius est exclusio
alterius.““

As Brown points out, however, such concerns are misplaced — courts
and tribunals have never considered general principles of law arising
from Article 38(3) of the ICJ Statute to exclude procedural powers and
indeed the PCIJ’s pronouncement in Electricity Company would appear
to directly contradict such a narrow reading in the case of provisional
measures.*° With respect to inherent powers, if these are to be considered
reflective of general principles of international law, then the argument
against also collapses for reasons connected to the procedural character
of such principles. If, however, inherent powers are linked to a criterion of
‘effectiveness, then they may be justified through the capacity of an inter-
national court to protect the integrity of its final award, as supported by a
considerable corpus of judicial authority*® — though one must be careful
to draw a distinction between what is truly necessary for a tribunal to
function effectively, and an act of judicial overreach that disparages party

8 See e.g. Dumbauld, Interim Measures, 180-1; Bernhardt (ed), ‘Discussion’, 126—7 (Herde-
gen); Rosenne, Provisional Measures, 11; Thirlway, 1 Law and Procedure, 966-7. Cf.
Rosenne, 2 Law and Practice, 578-9. That being said, Thirlway is not completely hos-
tile to the concept of inherent powers of international courts and tribunals. See Hugh
Thirlway, ‘Dilemma or Chimera? Admissibility of Illegally Obtained Evidence in Interna-
tional Adjudication’ (1984) 78 AJIL 622, 626:

If states in setting up an international body classify it as a court or tribunal, then
there is no need for them to spell out in its constitutive instrument that it is under
an obligation to hear both sides before deciding; by calling it a court they are already
implicitly giving it that instruction.

“4 Bernhardt (ed), ‘Discussion, 123-4 (Golsong), 133 (Sinclair); Thirlway, 1 Law and Proce-
dure, 704—5.
45 Brown, Common Law, 67-9, 127. 46 Ibid, 127-33.

SOFETST64T 9S 7 5.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae paw quate
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

LEGAL SOURCE OF THE POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES 143

consent, e.g. the use of incidental jurisdiction to stray beyond the prima
facie jurisdiction of the court or tribunal or to otherwise fundamentally
alter the proceedings.”

D_ Contours and Preconditions: Provisional Measures as Lex Specialis

1 Fixed Minimum Features of the Power

If there arises in international law a general power to award provisional
measures, what are the features of this power? As Brown has pointed out,
a measure of uniformity may be detected as between international courts
and tribunals when considering the preconditions for interim relief.*® This
prompts the question: which of these preconditions must be adopted by
international courts and tribunals as compulsory features of the power to
award provisional measures?

If it is presumed that the source of the power is a general principle of
international law, then the preconditions inherent in the exercise of the
power would appear to be minimal. As Pellet points out, the roots of such
principles lie in the municipal law of states,*? and a certain commonality
of practice must be observed if a coherent norm is to be identified. As
seen in Chapter 2, however, although most legal systems acknowledge
the capacity of a domestic tribunal to award interim relief, the conditions
according to which such relief is awarded vary considerably. Furthermore,
it is not sufficient for an international court or tribunal to simply apply
municipal concepts under the rubric of general principles — a measure of
transposition is required.°® As noted by Judge McNair in the South West
Africa advisory opinion:

The way in which international law borrows from [general principles of
law] is not be means of importing private law institutions ‘lock, stock and
barrel’, ready-made and fully equipped with a set of rules [...] [T]he true
view of the duty of international tribunals in this matter is to regard any
features or terminology which are reminiscent of the rules and institutions
of private law as an indication of policy and principles rather than directly
importing these rules and institutions.”!

47
48

Wolfrum, “Interim (Provisional) Measures’, §5.

Brown, Common Law, 135-51. Further: Cameron A Miles, “The Influence of the Inter-
national Court of Justice on the Law of Provisional Measures, in M Andenas and E
Bjorge (eds), A Farewell to Fragmentation: Reassertion and Convergence of International
Law (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015) 218.

” Pellet, ‘Article 38, 834. *° Ibid, 840-1.

>! International Status of South West Africa, ICJ Reports 1950 p 128, 148 (Judge McNair).
See also Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company Ltd (Belgium v Spain), ICJ Reports
1970 p 3, 66 (Judge Fitzmaurice).

nay

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
144 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Accordingly — aside from the fact of the power itself — only the broadest
contours of the capacity to award interim relief may be said to exist
as a general principle within the meaning of Article 38(1)(c). Based on
the pronouncements of courts and tribunals, these may be identified as
(a) the character of provisional measures proceedings as incidental; and
(b) the purpose for which provisional measures may be granted, i.e. to
protect rights pendente lite or to ensure non-escalation of the dispute.>?
A third factor may also be adduced which arises from the need to render
municipal concepts of interim relief useable on the international plane,
namely the need for some form of jurisdictional review by the court or
tribunal prior to the granting of provisional measures, though the precise
threshold of such a review is not necessarily fixed.°* Finally, the character
of provisional measures as binding on the parties would now appear to be
a minimum feature of the power to award interim relief, though this facet’s
emergence as such was attended by significant controversy, discussed at
length in Chapter 7.

Similar conclusions may be drawn if we conceive of provisional mea-
sures as arising from the need for international courts and tribunals to
protect the ‘effectiveness’ of their jurisdiction. The power, such as it is, is
to be realized realised by each individual court and tribunal, in accordance
with the provisions of its constituent instrument. Lauterpacht, in setting
out the parameters of the power as an expression of effectiveness in the
context of the ICJ, made note of the need for the Court to be seised and
jurisdiction tentatively established prior to the granting of relief, as well
as the need to ensure that provisional measures are only awarded in the
service of a particular purpose.**

2 Constitutive Instruments and Lex Specialis

Beyond the minimum requirements specified above, there is no formal
uniform law of provisional measures that exists generally between interna-
tional courts and tribunals. To the extent that a uniform law has developed,
its spread is attributable to the underlying logic ofits constituent elements.
Courts and tribunals are free to adopt or discard these elements as they see

°2 Although measures to prevent non-escalation may be said to arise from early international
practice, rather than domestic notions of interim relief: Chapter 2, §V.B.

3 Anglo-Iranian Oil, ICJ Reports 1951 p 89, 96-7 (Judges Winiarski and Badawi Pasha, diss).

4 Given Lauterpacht’s well-known championing of the prima facie jurisdiction test (below
SIV.A.2) his analysis sets the standard of review at this level: Lauterpacht, Development of
International Law, 252-6.

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae rt eN wnat
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

LEGAL SOURCE OF THE POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES 145

fit, although it should be noted that the existence of a jurisprudence con-
stante with respect to the preconditions of provisional measures carries
considerable weight. Additionally, when addressing the IC)’s influential
corpus of case law the argument that the Court’s jurisprudence should
be applied by another body is somewhat stronger where Article 41 of the
ICJ Statute has been used as a basis for that body’s authorization to award
interim relief — though again this is not definitive.

An example of the independence of different adjudicatory bodies in
this respect may be seen in the emergence of a possible divide between
the ICJ on the one hand and certain ICSID tribunals on the other on
the question of prejudice to rights pendente lite.’ Historically, the for-
mer has required the possibility of ‘irreparable; prejudice in order for
interim relief to be awarded.*° Recent instances of the latter, however,
have moved away from such a standard to require a putatively lower
threshold of ‘significant’ prejudice.°’ Similar arguments have been made
with respect to the provisional measures jurisprudence under UNCLOS,
although the tribunals there have been less willing to strike out from the
ICJ;°> indeed, the Annex VII tribunal in MOX Plant adopted the ICJ’s
standard of irreparability on the basis of ‘international judicial practice’
alone.”

°° Dan Sarooshi, ‘Provisional Measures and Investment Treaty Arbitration’ (2013) 29 Arb

Int’] 361, 377-9.

Denunciation of the Treaty of November 2nd, 1865 between China and Belgium (Belgium v

China) (1927) PCIJ Ser A No 8, 7; South-Eastern Greenland (1932) PCIJ Ser A/B No 48,

284; Fisheries Jurisdiction (UK v Iceland), IC) Reports 1972 p 12, 16; Land and Maritime

Boundary between Cameroon and Nigeria (Cameroon v Nigeria), Provisional Measures,

ICJ Reports 1996 p 13, 23.

°? City Oriente Ltd v Ecuador and Empesa Estatal Petréleos Del Ecuador, ICSID Case No
ARB/06/21 (Decision on Revocation of Provisional Measures, 13 May 2008) $$70-2;
Perence Ecuador Ltd v Ecuador and Empesa Estatal Petréleos Del Ecuador, ICSID Case No
ARB/08/6 (Decision on Provisional Measures, 8 May 2009) $43; Burlington Resources Inc
and Ors v Ecuador and Empesa Estatal Petréleos Del Ecuador, ICSID Case No ARB/08/5
(Procedural Order No 1, 29 June 2009) $51.

8 -M/V Saiga (No 2) (St Vincent and the Grenadines v Guinea), Provisional Measures (1998)
117 ILR 111, 143 (Judge Liang); Southern Bluefin Tuna (Australia v Japan; New Zealand v
Japan) (1999) 117 ILR 148, 170 (Judge Laing). Further: Edward A Laing, ‘A Perspective
on Provisional Measures under UNCLOS’ (1998) 29 NYIL 45.

>? MOX Plant (Ireland v UK), Procedural Order No 3 (2003) 123 ILR 310, 328 (Annex
VII). See also Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Company, CJSC Vostokneftegaz Company v
Mongolia, UNCITRAL (Interim Measures, 2 September 2008) $45 (making reference to the
five ‘internationally recognized’ preconditions of interim relief). Cf. Sarooshi, ‘Provisional
Measures, 370-1, arguing that no ‘international jurisprudence’ of provisional measures
can be said to exist.

56

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae tN wok at
via ae fF ie ;
LIDS VOL ora randa s

146 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Given the amorphous nature of the power, states can modify its scope
through the constitutive instrument of the court or tribunal in ques-
tion. For example, whilst Article 41 of the ICJ Statute and Article 47
of the ICSID Convention are phased in terms so general as to do little
more than confirm the existence of the power, UNCLOS Article 290(1)
simultaneously broadens and narrows its parameters, requiring that juris-
diction be established prima facie prior to the award of interim relief but
exceptionally permitting provisional measures for the prevention of seri-
ous harm to the marine environment. Such embellishments, when they
occur, constitute a lex specialis that may supplement or displace the gen-
eral power.°° The implications of this are seen in the order by the Court
of Arbitration in Kishenganga.®' There, the constitutive instrument of
the Court of Arbitration, the Indus Waters Treaty, contained a spe-
cific power to grant interim relief in Paragraph 28 of Annexure G. This
provided:

Either Party may request the Court at its first meeting to lay down, pending
its Award, such interim measures as, in the opinion of that Party, are
necessary to safeguard its interests under the Treaty with respect to the
matter in dispute, or to avoid prejudice to the final solution or aggravation
or extension of the dispute. The Court shall, thereupon, after having
afforded an adequate hearing to each Party, decide by a majority consisting
of at least four members of the Court, whether any interim measures are
necessary for the reasons herein before stated and, if so, shall specify such
measures: Provided that

(a) the Court shall lay down such interim measures only for such specified
period as, in its opinion, will be necessary to render the Award: this
period may, if necessary, be extended unless the delay in rendering the
Award is due to any delay on the part of the Party which requested the
interim measures in supplying such information as may be required
by the other Party or by the Court in connection with the dispute; and

(b) the specification of such interim measures shall not be construed as
an indication of any view of the Court on the merits of the dispute.

Faced with an application for provisional measures by Pakistan, India
responded by referring the Court to ICJ authorities concerning questions
of urgency and necessity, neither of which were the subject of express

6° ARSIWA Art 55. Further: James Crawford, State Responsibility: The General Part (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013) 103-5.

6! Indus Waters Kishenganga Arbitration (Pakistan v India), Interim Measures (2011) 150 ILR
311.

6 19 September 1960, 419 UNTS 215.

SOFETST64T 9S 7 5.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
PRIMA FACIE JURISDICTION 147

mention in Paragraph 28. Pakistan, in reply, asserted that the provision
furnished a self-contained set of rules and that the Court was barred from
even considering sources of law external thereto. Had the parties to the
Indus Waters Treaty wished to incorporate the ICJ’s view on the matter,
it was argued, they would have adopted Article 41 of the ICJ Statute as
a model.® India, for its part, argued that the jurisprudence of the ICJ
and other institutions was available to the Court of Arbitration so as to
aid in the interpretation of the ‘spare’ wording of Paragraph 28. The
Court adopted a nuanced view, holding that the provision ‘functions
as a kind of lex specialis prescribed by the framers of the provision that
makes unnecessary the imposition of further requirements’. Despite this
stance, however, the Court took note of the jurisprudence of other courts
and tribunals, including the ICJ, when discussing its capacity to award
interim relief ‘to avoid prejudice to the final solution’. It then referred
to ‘the general practice of international courts and tribunals, but was
careful to note that its motivation in invoking such practice was not blind
adherence, but policy concerns related to the extraordinary character of
interim relief awarded in an international context.°’

IV Prima Facie Jurisdiction

As stated, one of the most significant international elaborations to interim
relief arises from its interaction with consensual jurisdiction. The sine
qua non of provisional measures is to prevent damage to rights subject to
litigation or to otherwise forestall modification of the status quo between
the parties. Given the cumbersome nature of the international legal pro-
cess, the need to institute effective protection may preclude a full exami-
nation of the legal issues involved. However, the fundamental premise of
the jurisdiction of international courts and tribunals is consent.®? How
then, can an international court — which may lack jurisdiction — make

°° Kishenganga (2011) 150 ILR 311, 333-4. 4 Ibid, 334-5.

® Tbid, 350. °° Ibid, 351. ©” Ibid, 351-2.

68 Dumbauld, Interim Measures, 2-7; Elkind, Functional Approach, 167-8; Rosenne, Provi-
sional Measures, 85-91; John Collier and Vaughan Lowe, The Settlement of Disputes in
International Law: Institutions and Procedures (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999)
169. Also: Interhandel (Switzerland v US), Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports 1957 p 105,
118-19 (Judge Lauterpacht).

6 See e.g. Monetary Gold Removed from Rome in 1943 (Italy v France, UK and US), Pre-
liminary Objections, ICJ Reports 1954 p 19, 32; East Timor (Portugal v Australia), ICJ
Reports 1995 p 90, 101; Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v Canada), Preliminary Objections,
ICJ Reports 1998 p 432, 435. Further: Amerasinghe, Jurisdiction, 69-77.

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae tN wok at
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

148 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

an order touching on rights subject to litigation before it has finally
determined whether jurisdiction exists? The problem is only heightened
further in the postwar era of dispute settlement, where jurisdictional chal-
lenges are relatively common. Clearly, some form of jurisdictional review
is required prior to the awarding of interim relief — the question is one of
threshold.

Questions relating to the appropriate standard of jurisdictional review
did not arise before the PCIJ.”” However, the problem attained consider-
able prominence before the ICJ, and whilst it was effectively resolved by
the 1970s, dissent still lingered within the Court and was the subject of
continued academic commentary.’' The threshold that emerged from the
practice of the Court — prima facie jurisdiction — has been reliably adopted
by the other international courts and tribunals that emerged following
the brokering of the consensus.

Given its status as one of the basic features of the power to award
provisional measures in international law, the question of jurisdiction
must be addressed if relief is to be granted. Whilst international courts
and tribunals are able to dismiss applications for reasons unconnected
to the absence of jurisdiction,” if it is minded to award provisional
measures, jurisdiction must be established to the required level.” As noted

© See Chapter 2, §IV.C. Further: Jerzy Sztucki, Interim Measures in the Hague Court: An
Attempt at a Scrutiny (Deventer: Kluwer, 1983) 225-31.

7. See e.g. M H Mendelson, ‘Interim Measures of Protection in Cases of Contested Juris-
diction (1972-1973) 46 BYIL 259; V S Mani, ‘On Interim Measures of Protection: ICJ
Practice’ (1973) 13 [JIL 262, 268-71; Peter J Goldsworthy, “Interim Measures of Protection
in the International Court of Justice’ (1974) 68 AJIL 258, 262-8; J G Merrills, ‘Interim
Measures of Protection and the Substantive Jurisdiction of the International Court’ (1977)
36 CL] 86; Elkind, Functional Approach, ch 7; Sztucki, Interim Measures, 221-60; D W
Greig, “The Balancing of Interests and the Granting of Interim Protection by the Interna-
tional Court’ (1987) 11 AYIL 109, 110-19; J G Merrills, ‘Interim Measures of Protection in
the Recent Jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice’ (1995) 44 ICLQ 90, 91-101;
Collier and Lowe, Settlement of Disputes, 169-71.

See e.g. Aegean Sea, ICJ Reports 1973 p 3, 13. That said, the practice of the Court, even if
minded to dismiss applications, has been to address jurisdiction regardless: Interhandel,
ICJ Reports 1957 p 105, 110; Passage through the Great Belt (Denmark v Norway), Provi-
sional Measures, IC] Reports 1991 p 12, 15; Pulp Mills, Provisional Measure, ICJ Reports
2006 p 113, 128-9; Pulp Mills, ICJ Reports 2007 p 3, 10-11; Obligation to Prosecute or
Extradite (Belgium v Senegal), Provisional Measures, IC] Reports 2009 p 139, 147-50. Cf.
Trial of Pakistani Prisoners of War (Pakistan v India), Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports
1973 p 328, 328-31.

Shigeru Oda, ‘Provisional Measures: The Practice of the International Court, in V Lowe
and M Fitzmaurice (eds), Fifty Years of the International Court of Justice: Essays in Honour of

72

73

SOFETST64T 9S 7 5.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae rt eN wnat
via ae fF ie ;
LIDS VOL ora randa s

PRIMA FACIE JURISDICTION 149

by Judge Mosler in Aegean Sea, ‘provisional affirmation of jurisdiction is
[...] not “a circumstance” contributing to the necessity of provisional
measures [...] but a precondition of the examination whether such
“circumstances” exist’.”*

A The International Court of Justice

1 Early Debates and Discarded Alternatives

The problem was instantiated in Anglo-Iranian Oil, a politically complex
case which concerned a claim brought by the UK against Iran with respect
to the latter’s treatment of a British company following nationalization
of the Iranian oil industry.”” The jurisdiction of the Court was putatively
founded on an optional clause declaration made pursuant to Article 36(2)
of the ICJ Statute. Iran objected to the Court’s jurisdiction on the basis
that its declaration was limited to the application of agreements entered
into after the declaration was ratified, and that any agreement on which
the UK might substantively rely pre-dated that ratification. Faced with a
British application for provisional measures, Iran refused to participate
in this phase of proceedings, depriving the Court of the benefit of further
argument. The Court awarded provisional measures nonetheless, noting
that despite the reservations contained in Iran’s optional clause declara-
tion, ‘it cannot be accepted a priori that a claim based on such a complaint
falls outside the scope of international jurisdiction’.”°

Judges Winiarski and Badawi Pasha’s dissent captured the character
of the problem faced by the Court, and in this connection advocated a
higher standard of jurisdictional review, indeed reaching the tentative
conclusion that the Court lacked jurisdiction.”” In terms:

Sir Robert Jennings (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996) 541, 548-51; Oellers-
Frahm, ‘Article 41; in ICJ Commentary, 1039. Cf. Thirlway, 1 Law and Procedure, 931; 2
Law and Procedure, 1772-7.

74 Aegean Sea, ICJ Reports 1976 p 3, 25 (Judge Mosler). See also Interhandel, ICJ Reports
1957 p 105, 113 Judge Wellington Koo); Request for Interpretation of the Judgment of
15 June 1962 in the case concerning the Temple of Preah Vihear (Cambodia v Thailand)
(Cambodia v Thailand), Provisional Measures, IC] Reports 2011 p 537, 542 (‘whereas the
Court may indicate provisional measures in the context of proceedings for interpretation
of a judgment only if it is satisfied that there appears prima facie to exist a ‘dispute’ within
the meaning of Article 60 of the Statute’).

> Further: William W Bishop Jr, ‘The Anglo-Iranian Oil Company Case’ (1951) 45 AJIL
749,

’© Anglo-Iranian Oil, ICJ Reports 1951 p 89,92. 7” Ibid, 93.

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae paw quate
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

150 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

[T]he Court ought not to indicate interim measures of protection unless
its competence, in the event of this being challenged, appears to the Court
to be nevertheless reasonably probable. Its opinion in this point should
be reached after a summary consideration: it can only be provisional and
cannot prejudge its final decision after the detailed consideration to which
the Court will proceed in the course of adjudicating on the question in
conformity with all the Rules laid down for its procedure.”

The following year, the Court concurred with the dissenters and held that
it lacked jurisdiction over the dispute. In explaining its reversal, the Court
stated:

While the Court derived its power to indicate these provisional measures
from the special provisions contained in Article 41 of the Statute, it must
now derive its jurisdiction to deal with the merits from the general rules
laid down in Article 36 of the Statute. These general rules, which are
entirely different from the special provisions of Article 41, are based on
the principle that the jurisdiction of the Court to deal with and decide a
case on the merits depends on the will of the Parties. Unless the Parties
have conferred jurisdiction on the Court in accordance with Article 36,
the Court lacks such jurisdiction.”

The Court therefore acknowledged that the application of the ‘special
provisions’ of Article 41 required a standard of jurisdictional review apart
from that ordinarily required by Article 36. Anglo-Iranian Oilin this sense
generated two potential standards for jurisdictional review vis-d-vis pro-
visional measures: the majority’s negative test that the matter was a priori
not outside the scope of international (i.e. the Court’s) jurisdiction, and
the dissenters’ positive test that jurisdiction was reasonably probable.*”
In the following years, multiple tests ranging across a spectrum of juris-
dictional certainty would be proposed.*! Certain individual judges in

8 Ibid, 97.” Anglo-Iranian Oil, Preliminary Objection, ICJ Reports 1952 p 93, 102.

8° See also Fisheries Jurisdiction (UK v Iceland), ICJ Reports 1972 p 12, 22 (Judge Padilla
Nervo, diss); Fisheries Jurisdiction (FRG v Iceland), ICJ Reports 1972 p 30, 38-9 (Judge
Padilla Nervo, diss); Nuclear Tests (Australia v France), 1CJ Reports p 99, 126 (Judge Pétren,
diss); Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v France), ICJ Reports 1973 p 135, 161 (Judge Pétren,
diss); Aegean Sea, ICJ Reports 1976 p 3, 18 (Vice-President Singh).

81 A variety of taxonomies have been proposed to describe the spectrum of views. Collier and
Lowe identify five views within the early jurisprudence of the ICJ: Settlement of Disputes,
169-71. Mendelson identifies 11 possible standards, not necessarily by reference to any
case then extant: ‘Contested Jurisdiction’, 262—4. Thirlway identifies three: 1 Law and
Procedure, 930. Most usefully, Oellers-Frahm summarizes the spectrum as encompassing
‘certain jurisdiction, quasi-certain jurisdiction, prima facie existing jurisdiction to prima
facie lacking jurisdiction, doubtful jurisdiction, manifestly lacking jurisdiction, impossible
jurisdiction etc’: ‘Article 41, 1039.

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae paw quate
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

PRIMA FACIE JURISDICTION 151

the Nuclear Tests and Aegean Sea cases advocated for near-certainty of
jurisdiction®? — an implausible standard that undermined entirely the
need for urgent action in awarding provisional measures. A further possi-
bility was raised by President Jimenez de Aréchaga in the same cases, who
argued that the question of jurisdiction was but one factor to be taken into
account when determining whether to award interim relief,®’ a position
which was clearly at odds with the essential character of jurisdictional
review as described above.

2 Settled Practice of the International Court of Justice

These alternatives notwithstanding, the Court eventually settled on a
consensus position. This arose in Interhandel, not from the opinion of
the majority — which merely acknowledged the formal possibility of its
jurisdiction before rejecting the request on other grounds* — but from
the dissent of Judge Lauterpacht, who, relying on a principle ‘uniformly
adopted in international arbitral and judicial practice’®° proposed the
following test:

The Court may properly act under the terms of Article 41 provided that
there is in existence an instrument such as a Declaration of Acceptance
of the Optional Clause, emanating from the Parties to the dispute, which
prima facie confers jurisdiction upon the Court and which incorporates
no reservations obviously excluding its jurisdiction.*°

Beginning with the Fisheries Jurisdiction cases,°’ the substance of this
statement has been deployed by majorities in, inter alia, the Nuclear

82 Nuclear Tests (Australia v France), ICJ Reports 1973 p 99, 111 (Judge Forster, diss); Nuclear
Tests (New Zealand v France), ICJ Reports p 135, 148 (Judge Forster); Aegean Sea, ICJ
Reports 1976 p 3, 21 (Judge Morozov).

83 Nuclear Tests (Australia v France), ICJ Reports 1973 p 99, 107 (President Jimenez de
Aréchaga); Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v France), IC] Reports 1973 p 135, 143 (President
Jimenez de Aréchaga); Aegean Sea, ICJ Reports 1976 p 3. See also Great Belt, ICJ Reports
1991 p 3, 30 Judge Shahabuddeen).

84 Interhandel, ICJ Reports 1957 p 105, 110.

85 Lauterpacht gave no hint as to which ‘arbitral and judicial practice’ he was referring to in
Interhandel. However, in elaborating his thoughts extracurially, he made reference to the
jurisprudence of the MATs: Development of International Law, 254.

8° Interhandel, ICJ Reports 1957 p 105, 118-19 (Judge Lauterpacht). Judge Klaestad proposed
a reversal of the position eventually accepted, requiring examination ‘in a summary and
provisional manner whether it appears prima facie that the Court lacks jurisdiction to take
action’: ibid, 115 (emphasis added).

8? Fisheries Jurisdiction (UK v Iceland), ICJ Reports 1972 p 12, 16; Fisheries Jurisdiction (FRG
v Iceland), ICJ Reports 1972 p 30, 34.

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae rt eN wnat
via ae fF ie ;
LIDS VOL ora randa s

152 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Tests cases,®* Nicaragua, Pulp Mills,° Georgia v Russia,’! and Obligation
to Prosecute or Extradite,’” and forms the basis for a jurisprudence con-
stante within the ICJ, effectively resolving the question of the threshold of
review within that body once and for all. Early cases, however, raised the
question of what exactly might constitute prima facie jurisdiction, with
the apparent position being that the requirement would be satisfied if an
applicant could point to an instrument on which the formal possibility of
jurisdiction might be founded.” Thus, in Interhandel, the majority was
concerned only with the fact that the US had made an optional clause
declaration under Article 36(2) of the Statute — it paid no attention to the
issues surrounding the legality of the so-called Connally Reservation that
purported to exclude the dispute.

More recent decisions, however, have indicated that surmounting the
threshold is not automatic, and that the Court is willing to involve itself
to a greater extent in the legal issues that might surround jurisdiction
in a particular case.”* In the Use of Force cases, for example, the Court
was confronted with a Yugoslav claim against the NATO membership
in which the principal basis of claim was Article XI of the Genocide
Convention.”? The Court, acknowledging that Article XI could serve as a
basis for those states who had not made any reservation thereto,” went
one step further in its analysis and determined that NATO’s bombing of
Yugoslav territory did not constitute genocide within the meaning of the
Convention. Consequently Article XI could not be used to found prima
facie jurisdiction.”’

Accordingly, the modern test of prima facie jurisdiction involves an
examination of the ICJ’s jurisdiction in toto, taking into account not

88 Nuclear Tests (Australia v France), ICJ Reports 1973 p 99, 101; Nuclear Tests (New Zealand

v France), IC) Reports 1973 p 135, 137.

Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v US), Provisional

Measures, IC] Reports 1984 p 169, 179.

° Pulp Mills, ICJ Report 2006 p 113, 128-9.

°! Application of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (Georgia v Russian Federation), Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports 2008
p 353, 377.

* Obligation to Prosecute or Extradite, ICJ Reports 2009 p 139, 151.

°° Goldsworthy, ‘Interim Measures, 265-6.  *4 Thirlway, 1 Law and Procedure, 933-5.

°° Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, 9 December

1948, 78 UNTS 277.

See e.g. Legality of Use of Force (Yugoslavia v Belgium), Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports

1999 p 124, 137.

7 Tbid, 138.

89

nary

96

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae paw quate
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

PRIMA FACIE JURISDICTION 153

only the putative foundation of the jurisdiction (i.e. an optional clause
declaration or compromissory clause) and the existence of a dispute, but
also any legal complications that may arise, as specified by the respondent.
That said, it should still be emphasized, as Judge Greenwood did in Georgia
v Russia, that the ‘jurisdictional threshold which the applicant has to cross
[at the provisional measures stage] is [...] set quite low and any ruling —
whether as to fact or law — which the Court makes [...] is necessarily
provisional’”® For this reason, the benefit of the doubt when assessing
jurisdiction vis-a-vis provisional measures is given to the claimant, a
reversal of the Court’s usual position when ascertaining its jurisdiction
finally.’ Naturally, where the respondent concedes jurisdiction or fails to
challenge it provisionally, the need for such an analysis disappears, such
that the Court may simply take note of the concession before considering
the other elements of the application.!°

It need hardly be added that a failure to prove prima facie jurisdic-
tion does not bode well for a subsequent full examination of the issue.
Notwithstanding the formal declaration that a determination of prima
facie jurisdiction (vel non) is without prejudice as to a determination of
jurisdiction proper, the Court may reluctantly order a case be removed
from its General List when a request for provisional measures fails for a
manifest lack of jurisdiction such as to make a fuller examination of the
question pointless. Such a fate befell the applications against the US and
Spain in the Use of Force cases.'°!

°8 Georgia v Russia, ICJ Reports 2011 p 70, 323 (Judge Greenwood).

°° Nicaragua, ICJ Reports 1984 p 169, 207 (Judge Schwebel, diss).

100 See e.g. Armed Activities in the Territory of the Congo (DRC v Uganda), Provisional
Measures, ICJ Reports 2000 p 111, 123; Certain Criminal Proceedings in France (Congo
v France), Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports 2003 p 102, 106-7; Pulp Mills, IC] Reports
2006 p 113, 129; Certain Activities carried out by Nicaragua in the Border Area (Costa Rica
v Nicaragua), Provisional Measures, IC] Reports 2011 p 6, 17-18; Certain Documents and
Data, ICJ, Order of 3 March 2014, §20. Further: Thirlway, 2 Law and Procedure, 1778.
Legality of Use of Force (Yugoslavia v Spain), Provisional Measures, IC] Reports 1999
p 761, 769; Legality of Use of Force (Yugoslavia v US), Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports
1999 p 916, 925. Cf. Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application:
2002) (DRC v Rwanda), Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports 2002 p 219, 249; Request for
Interpretation of the Judgment of 15 June 1962 in the Case concerning the Temple of Preah
Vihear (Cambodia v Thailand) (Cambodia v Thailand), Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports
2011 p 537, 544. Further: Rosenne, Provisional Measures, 132-4. An interesting question
arises as to what might have happened in the Use of Force cases if the provisional measures
application had not been made, and whether the respondents in those cases could have
relied on some other procedural technique to establish a manifest lack of jurisdiction.

10

paar

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae paw quate
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

154 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

However, the ICJ’s internal practice may indicate that — efforts to dissect
the Court’s pronouncements aside — prima facie jurisdiction is in most
cases little more than a convenient rubric, with the Court already having
determined whether jurisdiction exists. Speaking extracurially on the
plethora of review standards then hypothesized, President Jimenez de
Aréchaga remarked:

No individual judge is in my experience satisfied with a mere possibility or
even a probability of jurisdiction and does not follow a positive or negative
test as to the likelihood of jurisdiction. In each subjective view, jurisdic-
tion over the merits must exist before a vote for provisional measures is
given. It follows that interim measures will not be granted unless a major-
ity of judges believes at the time that there will be jurisdiction over the
merits. !

Although this pronouncement only holds sway with respect to the period
1970-1979, when Jimenez de Aréchaga was a judge of the Court, it remains
disquieting nonetheless, revealing as it does a practice of concealing from
the parties the fact that the Court in addressing interim measures has
already reached a conclusion as to jurisdiction.'”° The virtue of the prima
facie approach at that point in time was thus to enable the expression
of that consensus without the need to engage in the kind of forensic
reasoning that would characterize a decision on jurisdiction proper. It is
perhaps for this reason that it is relatively rare for the Court to find that
it lacks jurisdiction once a determination of prima facie jurisdiction has
been made.!"* But whether this reflects the modern position of the Court
is doubtful, with its more recent decisions being attended by a far greater
degree of reasoning as to the existence of prima facie jurisdiction where
preliminary objections have been raised.'°°

In the event that they could not, this raises some disturbing thoughts about the role of
provisional measures, whereby the determination of the principle of the respondent’s
consent at an early stage becomes dependent on the taking of a procedural step by the
claimant that is formally supposed to be without prejudice to later determinations as to
jurisdiction or the merits. This does not sit well with the ordinary conception of what
provisional measures are supposed to do, and how they are supposed to operate: Alina
Miron, “Working Methods of the Court’ (2016) 7 JIDS 371, 381.

102 F Jimenez de Aréchaga, ‘International Law in the Past Third of a Century’ (1978) 159

Hague Recueil 9, 161.

Greig, “Balancing of Interests’, 116-17.

A total reversal of this sort has only occurred in two cases: Anglo-Iranian Oil, ICJ Reports

1952 p 93, 102; Georgia v Russia, Preliminary Objections, ICJ Reports 2011 p 70, 140.

105 See e.g. Georgia v Russia, ICJ Reports 2008 p 353, 378-88.

103
104

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae rt eN wnat
via ae fF ie ;
LIDS VOL ora randa s

PRIMA FACIE JURISDICTION 155

B_ Dispute Settlement Under UNCLOS

1 UNCLOS Article 290(1)

The prima facie standard of jurisdictional review developed by the ICJ has
proved extremely influential within the wider network of international
courts and tribunals. ITLOS and Annex VII tribunals have to an extent led
this adoption,!”° but this is hardly surprising — the standard is incorpo-
rated directly into UNCLOS Articles 290(1) and (5), effectively removing
any choice of alternative. However, ITLOS has nonetheless turned to the
ICJ when interpreting the bare words of the provision. In M/V Saiga (No
2), the Tribunal expressed the test in a form of words identical to that
characteristically used by the ICJ, noting that:

Considering that before prescribing provisional measures the Tribunal need
not finally satisfy itself that it has jurisdiction on the merits and yet it
may not prescribed such measures unless the provisions invoked by the
applicant appear prima facie to afford a basis on which the jurisdiction of
the tribunal might be founded [... ]!°

This formula was also invoked — though it was credited to M/V Saiga
(No 2) —in M/V Louisa, the only other case (so far) in which provisional
measures have been requested of ITLOS directly under UNCLOS Article
290(1).1°8 A broadly similar form of words was utilized by the Annex VII
tribunal in MOX Plant, which noted that jurisdiction to order provisional

measures exists under paragraph 1 of the provision where ‘there is nothing

which manifestly and in terms excludes the Tribunal’s jurisdiction’!

106 Riidiger Wolfrum, ‘Provisional Measures of the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea’, in P C Rao and R Khan (eds), The International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
(The Hague: Kluwer, 2001) 173, 178-90; Thomas A Mensah, ‘Provisional Measures in
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea’ (2002) 62 ZadRV 43, 50; Natalie Klein,
Dispute Settlement in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2005) 61-9; Rosenne, Provisional Measures, 126; Brown, Common Law,
137,

107 M/V Saiga (No 2) (St Vincent and the Grenadines v Guinea), Provisional Measures (1998)
117 ILR 111, 126. See further ibid, 133 (Judge Laing), drawing an express parallel with
the jurisprudence of the ICJ.

108 -M/V Louisa (St Vincent and the Grenadines v Spain), Provisional Measures (2010) 148
ILR 459, 471.

109 MOX Plant (Annex VII) (2003) 126 ILR 310, 317. Cf. the extracurial writings of Judge
Ndiaye, who argues that the jurisdiction to award provisional measures only arises where
‘jt is reasonably probable that the arbitral tribunal would have jurisdiction on the merits’:
Tafsir Malick Ndiaye, ‘Provisional Measures Before the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea’, in M H Nordquist and J N Moore (eds), Current Marine Environmental
Issues and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff,
2001) 97.

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
156 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Operating as it does within the confines of UNCLOS, the prima facie
jurisdiction requirement of Article 290 throws up certain common issues,
including the obligation of the parties to exchange views under Article
283(1), the presence of alternative dispute settlement procedures under
Article 281, and exceptions to the UNCLOS regime of compulsory dispute
resolution arising out of Part XV, Section 3 thereof.''°

2 UNCLOS Article 290(5)

The referred jurisdiction of ITLOS to award interim relief on behalf of
another adjudicatory body has certain implications for the determination
of prima facie jurisdiction. Express reference to the jurisprudence of the
ICJ concerning prima facie jurisdiction has generally not been raised in
cases in which ITLOS has considered provisional measures under UNC-
LOS Article 290(5), with the Tribunal usually content with citing para-
graph 5 at length or otherwise alluding to its content.'!’ A determination
by ITLOS of prima facie jurisdiction under Article 290(5) will not affect
the capacity of an Annex VII tribunal or other designated body to deter-
mine its own jurisdiction prima facie under Article 290(1), though its
findings will naturally carry some weight.!”

Notwithstanding the formal equality of the prima facie jurisdiction
test as between Articles 290(1) and (5), there is the perception on the
part of some members of ITLOS that there is a difference between provi-
sional measures ordered in the name of the Tribunal proper and measures
ordered on behalf of an Annex VII tribunal or some other nominated
body. In ARA Libertad, Judges Wolfrum and Cot noted that:

Whereas under article 290, paragraph 1, of the Convention, the Tribunal
is called upon to decide prima facie on its own jurisdiction, under article
290, paragraph 5 of the Convention it must decide on the prima facie
jurisdiction of some other court or tribunal. Out of respect for the other
court or tribunal, the Tribunal has to exercise some restraint in questioning
prima facie the jurisdiction of such other court or tribunal [...] It is
equally unsatisfactory if the arbitral tribunal under Annex VII denies

110 Klein, Dispute Settlement in UNCLOS, 62-9.

M1 Southern Bluefin Tuna (1999) 117 ILR 148, 160; MOX Plant (Ireland v UR), Provisional
Measures (2001) 126 ILR 257, 271; Land Reclamation by Singapore in and around the Straits
of Johor (Singapore v Malaysia), Provisional Measures (2003) 126 ILR 487, 497; Arctic
Sunrise (Netherlands v Russia), ITLOS Case No 22 (Provisional Measures, 22 November
2013) $58; Enrica Lexie Incident (Italy v India), ITLOS Case No 24 (Provisional Measures,
24 August 2015) §35. Cf. ARA Libertad (Argentina v Ghana), Provisional Measures (2012)
156 ILR 186, 199.

112 MOX Plant (Annex VII) (2003) 126 ILR 310, 317.

PSTS4T 8S 72.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
PRIMA FACIE JURISDICTION 157

its jurisdiction which the Tribunal has established prima facie as it is
for the settlement of the said dispute if the Tribunal denies prima facie
jurisdiction in a situation where the arbitral tribunal would have voted
otherwise.''”

This passage would tend to highlight, if not a reduced threshold of prima
facie jurisdiction, then at least the notion of giving the benefit of a fur-
ther doubt to the applicant in UNCLOS Article 290(5) cases.'!* But at
the same time, the Judges noted, greater jurisdictional rigour was gener-
ally required of dispute settlement bodies convened under UNCLOS as,
unlike the ICJ, these operate under a narrow grant of competence ratione
materiae covering only those disputes concerning the interpretation and
application of UNCLOS. Thus:

Any attempt to broaden the jurisdictional power of the Tribunal and that
of arbitral tribunals under Annex VII going beyond what is prescribed
in [A]rticle 288 of the Convention is not in keeping with the basic phi-
losophy governing the dispute settlement system of the Convention [and
undermines] the understanding reached at [UNCLOS II].!!°

It would appear in ARA Libertad that ITLOS was minded to adopt a very
liberal interpretation of prima facie jurisdiction. In that case, the reason-
ing of the Tribunal did not consist of addressing the basis of jurisdiction
identified by Argentina and any legal complications arising,''® but was
tantamount to prying apart the wording of the Convention in search of a
mandate. The case concerned the seizure of an Argentine warship in the
Ghanaian port of Tema, classified as internal waters for the purposes of
UNCLOS. The seizure was in clear violation of the universally recognized
immunity of warships under customary international law,!'” but UNC-
LOS only expressly incorporated this immunity with respect to the high

113 ARA Libertad (2012) 156 ILR 186, 215 (Judges Wolfrum and Cot). See also Francisco
Orrego Vicufia, “The International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and Provisional
Measures: Settled Issues and Pending Problems’ (2007) 22 IJMCL 451, 459-61.

44° Cf. Southern Bluefin Tuna (2001) 117 ILR 148, 181-5 (Judge ad hoc Shearer), arguing
that the majority’s inquiry into its provisional jurisdiction went far beyond a prima facie
inquiry.

1S ARA Libertad (2012) 156 ILR 186, 215-16.

116 Cf, the approach adopted in Arctic Sunrise, ITLOS Case No 22, §$36—45.

117 UN Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of the State, annexed to GA Res 59/49, 2
December 2004, Art 21(1)(b). Further: Chester Brown and Roger O'Keefe, ‘Article 213, in
R O'Keefe and C Tams (eds), The United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities
of States and Their Property: A Commentary (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013) 334,
342.

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
158 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

seas per Article 95. The Tribunal found, however, that UNCLOS Arti-
cle 32, providing relevantly that ‘nothing in this Convention affects the
immunities and other government ships operating for non-commercial
purposes, could form the basis of prima facie jurisdiction, as it could be
interpreted as extending warship immunity under the Convention into
internal waters.'!® Such a reading is patently absurd, as is made clear by
the subsequent analysis of Judges Wolfrum and Cot, which was argued
by reference to the case law of the ICJ.'!? Firstly, the provision is clearly a
savings clause, providing only that the customary immunity is not under-
mined by the Convention, as opposed to establishing a positive treaty
right that could be the subject of jurisdiction. Secondly, had the drafters
of the provision intended that it have the effect contended, then a perfectly
good model was available in the form of UNCLOS Article 95 concerning
high seas immunity. Thirdly, if Article 32 was (as contended) intended
to incorporate warship immunity wholesale into the Convention, then
Article 95 would be superfluous.

It is too early to tell whether ARA Libertad signals the beginning of
a move by ITLOS to reduce the threshold of prima facie jurisdiction in
UNCLOS Article 290(5) cases. What is clear, however, is that a greater
effort on the part of the Tribunal is required to define the jurisdictional
requirements in such cases, as well as the differences (if any) with the
approach taken under Article 290(1) and by the IC].

C_ Inter-State Arbitration

The limited modern examples of ad hoc inter-state arbitration tribunals
have not yet been required as yet to rule on a request for provisional mea-
sures in a situation in which jurisdiction is contested. As seen in Kishen-
ganga, the question is heavily conditioned on the constitutive instrument
and procedural rules of the tribunal, but absent a lex specialis excluding
a review of this kind, some jurisdictional threshold must be met. The
prima facie test advocated by other international courts and tribunals

118 ARA Libertad (2012) 156 ILR 186, 196-200.

119 Tbid, 224-8. The judges still found that prima facie jurisdiction existed, but did so on
the basis that Ghana’s acknowledgement of the Libertad’s immunity prior to its visit to
Tema estopped it from opposing a judicial procedure intended to resolve the dispute
arising from Argentina’s reliance on said acknowledgement: ibid, 231—2. This is similarly
specious, as an acceptance of state immunity obviously does not translate ipso facto into
an acceptance of the jurisdiction of an international court or tribunal.

PSTS4T 8S 72.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
PRIMA FACIE JURISDICTION 159

would appear to be a natural candidate in this respect although, as stated,
the body in question should not feel constrained to adopt it.

D_Investor-State Arbitration

Assessment of prima facie jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention is
complicated slightly by the express provision for a form of jurisdic-
tional triage prior to the composition of a tribunal. Article 36(3) of the
ICSID Convention provides that on receiving a request for arbitration,
the Secretary-General of ICSID must register the request “unless he finds,
on the basis of the information contained in that request, that the dispute
is manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Centre’ This threshold is less
that required of a prima facie review, being designed to exclude frivolous
actions and to ‘avoid a situation where a tribunal, once established would
almost certainly find itself without jurisdiction’ ”° An investigation of the
drafting history of the provision indicates that the Secretary-General’s
screening power was intended to be administrative in character, not to
function as an extension of the kompetenz-kompetenz of any tribunal later
empanelled.!?! As such, although an ICSID tribunal is in no sense bound
by the determination of Secretary-General in permitting the listing of a
claim, registration is a factor that may be taken into account — though it
is not on its own sufficient to establish prima facie jurisdiction.”

As might be expected, the practice of ICSID tribunals has been to
importa standard of jurisdictional review very similar to that of the ICJ.'7°
Early decisions did not set out the threshold in this respect, although it

120 ICSID Commentary, 468.

1 T]-2 ICSID History, 722 (Broches), 774 (Ghachem), 775 (Tsai). See also the Report of the
Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States, 18 March 1965, I ICSID Reports 23, 27. Further:
ICSID Commentary, 469-70; S D Sutton, ‘Emilio Augustin Maffezini v Kingdom of Spain
and the ICSID Secretary-General’s Screening Power’ (2005) 21 Arb Int'l 113, 121. Cf.
Charles N Brower and Ronald E M Goodman, ‘Provisional Measures and the Protection
of ICSID Jurisdictional Exclusivity Against Municipal Proceedings’ (1991) 6 ICSID Rev —
FIL] 431, 452-6, arguing that the screening threshold is broadly commensurate to a prima
facie review.

122" Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v Chile, Provisional Measures (2001)
6 ICSID Reports 373, 377; Millicom International Operations BV and Sentel GSM SA v
Senegal, ICSID Case No ARB/08/20 (Decision on the Application of Provisional Measures,
9 December 2009) $42; PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd v Papua New Guinea,
ICSID Case No ARB/33/13 (Provisional Measures, 19 January 2015) $119.

23 ICSID Commentary, 771-4; Sam Luttrell, ‘ICSID provisional measures “in the round”
(2015) 31 Arb Int'l 393, 398-400.

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae paw quate
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

160 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

was recognized in the first ICSID order on provisional measures in 1974,
Holiday Inns v Morocco, that any determination on jurisdiction vis-a-vis
interim relief was without prejudice to any later finding on jurisdiction
proper, or the merits themselves.'** Over time, however, ICSID tribunals
have come to embrace the prima facie standard set by the ICJ, making
particular note of the debt owed by Article 47 of the ICSID Convention
to Article 41 of the ICJ Statute. In Casado v Chile, for example, the
Tribunal relief on the case law of the ICJ in determining that it was under
an obligation to determine ‘in cases where jurisdiction is contested, the
prima facie existence of jurisdiction, or, to couch this in negative terms,
the absence of a clear lack of jurisdiction.'*? A more express formulation
of the same may be seen in Occidental v Ecuador, where the Tribunal
said:

Whilst the Tribunal need not satisfy itself that it has jurisdiction in respect
of the merits of the case at issue for purposes of ruling upon the requested
provisional measures, it will not order such measures unless there is, prima
facie, a basis upon which the Tribunal’s jurisdiction might be established.!”°

Jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention is established via the “dou-
ble keyhole’ of Article 25 of the Convention and the requirements of
the relevant bilateral or multilateral investment treaty.!?” The same dual
requirement applies in relation to jurisdictional review regarding interim
relief.'?8 Common objections may include that the claimant has not made
a qualifying investment within the meaning of either the Convention or
the BIT for the purposes of jurisdiction ratione materiae, that it is not
a national of a contracting state for the purposes of jurisdiction ratione

24 Pierre Lalive, ‘The First “World Bank” Arbitration (Holiday Inns v Morocco) — Some Legal
Problems’ (1980) 51 BYIL 123, 132-7.

25 Casado v Chile (2001) 6 ICSID Reports 373, 379.

6 Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company
v Ecuador, ICSID Case No ARB/06/11 (Provisional Measures, 17 August 2007) $55. See
also Churchill Mining PLC v Indonesia, ICSID Case No ARB/12/13 (Procedural Order
No 3, 4 March 2013) $36:

It is undisputed that the Tribunal has the power to recommend provisional measures
prior to ruling on its jurisdiction. However, the Tribunal will not exercise such power
unless it has prima facie jurisdiction.

27 Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka AS v Slovak Republic, ICSID Case No ARB/97/4 (Decision
on Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999) $68. Further: ICSID Commentary, 82-3.

28 Tethyan Copper Company Pty Ltd v Pakistan, ICSID Case No ARB/12/1 (Provisional
Measures, 13 December 2012) $§123-33.

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae paw quate
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

PRIMA FACIE JURISDICTION 161

personae, or a lack of effective consent to arbitration on the part of the
respondent.!”? In this, it is sufficient that facts alleged by the applicant
establish this jurisdiction, it being presumably unnecessary or impos-
sible to verify them and analyze them in depth at this phase of the
proceedings.'*° It should be noted, moreover, that where a respondent
state requests interim relief, it does not need to demonstrate prima facie

jurisdiction, as this would require the respondent to ‘establish the negative

against its own interest’.'>!

A similar predilection has been displayed by investor-state arbitra-
tion tribunals operating under the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules and variants
thereof. Although Article 26 does not specify that jurisdiction must be
assessed prior to the award of provisional measures, the Iran—US Claims
Tribunal nonetheless introduced a prima facie standard of review with
reference to the jurisprudence of the ICJ,'°? and further held that a find-
ing of prima facie jurisdiction was without prejudice to any fuller inquiry
as to jurisdiction or the merits.'°> The same instinct may be seen in more
modern forms of ad hoc investor-state arbitration. In Paushok v Mongolia,
the Tribunal established the need for a prima facie review of jurisdiction

29 Zachary Douglas, The International Law of Investment Claims (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2009) chs 4, 7, 8; Rudolph Dolzer and Christoph Schreuer, Principles of
International Investment Law (Oxford: Oxford University Press 2nd edn, 2012) 245-64.

130 Millicom v Senegal, ICSID Case No ARB/08/20, $43.

151 RSM Production Corporation v St Lucia, ICSID Case No ARB/12/10 (Security for Costs,

13 August 2014) $5 (Arbitrator Griffin).

See e.g. Bendone-Derossi International v Iran, Provisional Measures (1984) 6 Iran—US

CTR 130, 131; Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp v Iran, Provisional Measures

(1984) 6 Iran—US CTR 104, 108; Aeronutronic Overseas Services Inc v Iran, Provisional

Measures (1985) 8 Iran—US CTR 75, 77; Component Builders Inc, Wood Components Co

and Moshovsky Enterprises Inc v Iran, Provisional Measures (1985) 8 Iran—US CTR 216,

220. Earlier decisions demonstrated a certain coyness as to jurisdiction, simply stating

that ‘it would appear’ that the Tribunal had jurisdiction: Rockwell International Systems v

Tran, Provisional Measures (1983) 2 Iran—US CTR 369, 370; RCA Global Communications

Disc Inc v Iran, Provisional Measures (1983) 4 Iran—US CTR 5, 7. On the practice of the

Tribunal, see further David D Caron, ‘Interim Measures of Protection: Theory and

Practice in Light of the Iran—United States Claims Tribunal’ (1986) 46 ZadRV 465, 488-

90; Stuart Abercrombie Baker and Mark David Davis, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

in Practice: The Experience of the Iran—United States Claims Tribunal (Deventer: Kluwer,

1992) 139; Charles N Brower and Jason D Brueschke, The Iran—United States Claims

Tribunal (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1998) 218-21; David D Caron, Lee M Caplan

and Matti Pellonpaéa, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: A Commentary (Oxford: Oxford

University Press, 2006) 535-6.

153 See e.g. Tadjer-Cohen Associates v Iran (1985) 9 Iran—US CTR 302, 304.

me

132

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae paw quate
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

162 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

by reference to the ICJ’s pronouncement in Nicaragua.'** Despite the
added procedural complexity of Article 26 of the 2010 UNCITRAL Rules,
there is no reason to suggest that they would operate any differently as
a matter of practice, with the requirement in paragraph 3(b) that the
application have a reasonable chance of success on the merits deemed to
include a prima facie examination of jurisdiction.'*°

Acommon feature of all forms of investment arbitration is the potential
for detailed questions of jurisdiction to be placed to one side at the time
of objection and heard alongside the merits of the claim on the basis that
such questions are closely related to the merits of the dispute they are
not yet ripe for decision or a fuller examination of the factual evidence
is required.'°° Where this occurs in the context of provisional measures,
the Tribunal will generally give the applicant the benefit of the doubt and
deem the prima facie requirement to be satisfied.!%”

V_ Prima Facie Admissibility
A Jurisdiction and Admissibility Distinguished

Jurisdiction is not the only class of preliminary objection that may condi-
tion a state’s consent to international dispute settlement. A separate but
related objection pertains to the admissibility of the claim in question.
The two concepts are not always easily separated,'°® but the essence of the

54 Paushok v Mongolia, UNCITRAL, $47, citing Nicaragua, ICJ Reports 1984 p 169, 179.
Cf. Chevron v Ecuador, PCA Case No 2009-23 (Interim Measures, 9 February 2011) $10,
referring only to ‘a sufficient case for the existence of such jurisdiction’

85 David D Caron and Lee M Caplan, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: A Commentary
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2nd edn, 2012) 522-3. Further: Guaracachi America
Inc and Rurelec PLC v Bolivia, PCA Case No 2011-17 (Procedural Order No 14, 11 March
2013) $4.

136 ICSID Commentary, 538—A0.

157 See e.g. Paushok v Mongolia, UNCITRAL, §$50-53.

‘88 To the extent that remains debate as to whether admissibility can be said to have an exis-
tence separate from jurisdiction, particularly in the investment arbitration context: see
e.g. CMS Gas Transmission Company v Argentina, ICSID Case No ARB/01/8 (Decision on
Jurisdiction, 18 July 2003) $41; Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets LP v Argentina,
ICSID Case No ARB/95/3 (Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 January 2004) $33; cf. SGS Société
Générale de Surveillance SA v Philippines, ICSID Case No ARB/02/6 (Decision on Juris-
diction, 24 January 2004) §169ff. Further: Shabtai Rosenne, ‘International Courts and
Tribunals, Jurisdiction and Admissibility of Inter-State Applications, MPEPIL (2006);
Gerold Zeiler, Jurisdiction, Competence and Admissibility of Claims in ICSID Arbitra-
tion Proceedings, in C Binder et al. (eds), International Investment Arbitration for the
21st Century: Essays in Honour of Christoph Schreuer (Oxford: Oxford University Press,

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae paw quate
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

PRIMA FACIE ADMISSIBILITY 163

distinction was captured by Fitzmaurice, who stated that jurisdiction ‘is a
plea that the tribunal itself is incompetent to give any ruling at all whether
as to the merits or as to the admissibility of the claim’, whilst admissibility
refers to ‘a plea that the tribunal should rule the claim on some ground
other than its ultimate merits.'°? Similarly, Arbitrator Highet’s dissent
from the ruling of the NAFTA tribunal in Waste Management v Mexico
provided that ‘[j]urisdiction is the power of the tribunal to hear the case;
admissibility is whether the case itself is defective — whether it is appro-
priate for the tribunal to hear it.'*° A more instrumentalist summation
is that of Shany, who remarks that rules on admissibility authorize courts
‘to decline to exercise judicial power [and] allow the translation of gen-

eral judicial policies relating to justice, fairness, legality, legitimacy, and

effectiveness to specific cases’.*!

Challenges to admissibility cover a wide range of potential objections
and may include delay in presenting the claim, failure to exhaust local
remedies (where applicable), mootness, or failure to join a necessary
third party.'*? Moreover, obstacles to admissibility may be removed by
events occurring post-seisen.'** A useful example in this respect arose in
SGS v Philippines, where the claimant and respondent entered into an

2009) 76; Cameron A Miles, ‘Corruption, Jurisdiction and Admissibility in International
Investment Claims’ (2012) 3 JIDS 329, 333-9; Yuval Shany, ‘Jurisdiction and Admissi-
bility, in C P R Romano, K J Alter and Y Shany (eds), Oxford Handbook of International
Adjudication (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014) 781.

139 Fitzmaurice, 2 Law and Procedure, 438-9. Further: Oil Platforms (Iran v US), ICJ Reports
2003 p 161, 177.

M0 Waste Management Inc v Mexico, ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/98/2 (Award, 2000) $58
(Arbitrator Highet, diss).

Ml Shany, Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 804.

42" Nuclear Tests (Australia v France), ICJ Reports 1974 p 253, 423 (Judge ad hoc Barwick,
diss). Further: Brownlie’s Principles, 693, 697-701. In the particular context of investment
claims, objections to admissibility may further include the contractual choice of forum,
shareholder claims, dispositions related to the legal or beneficial ownership of the invest-
ment, and the effect of a denial of benefits clause in the relevant investment agreement:
Douglas, Investment Claims, 146-8.

M3" Toan Micula, Viorel Micula, SC European Food SA, SC Starmill SRL and SC Multipack SRL
v Romania, ICSID Case No ARB/05/20 (Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 24
September 2008) $64. Cf. Kilic Insaat Ithalat Thracat Sanayi ve Ticaret Anonim Sirketi v
Turkmenistan, ICSID Case No ARB/10/1 (Award, 2 July 2013) §27 (Arbitrator Park):

Procedural flaws that may be cured during the arbitration are often characterized by
reference to notions such as ripeness, recevabilité or admissibility. Such terms derive
not from technical treaty definition, but from usage as convenient labels to describe
steps to be taken either before or after constitution of a tribunal, even if they must be
met prior to merits being addressed.

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae rt eN wnat
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

164 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

investment contract. The contract contained a dispute resolution clause
requiring litigation before the ‘Regional Trial Courts of Makati or Manila’
in the event of a disagreement. When a putative breach of the contract
later gave rise to a claim under Article VUI of the Switzerland—Philippines
BIT, an ICSID tribunal held that although the clause could not abrogate
its jurisdiction, the presence of an exclusive jurisdiction agreement within
the contract that formed the basis of the claim posed a legal impediment
to the admissibility of the dispute. As such, the Tribunal determined that
the claim was premature, and could not proceed until the contractually
agreed process (i.e. litigation before the Filipino courts) had taken place,
at which time the arbitration could resume.'**

B Prima Facie Admissibility and the International Court of Justice

As its jurisprudence on admissibility has evolved, ICJ has taken to assessing
the prima facie admissibility of a claim when considering a request for
provisional measures.'*? Early hints of this development came where
the Court rejected a request for provisional measures for lack of prima
facie admissibility occurred in the attempted revisiting of Nuclear Tests
by New Zealand in Examination of the Situation. There, an attempt to
secure provisional measures on the basis of the famous paragraph 63 of
the ICJ’s 1974 decision™® failed on the basis that the paragraph could
only be invoked as a basis for a claim in the presence of atmospheric
nuclear testing, whereas France only persisted in conducting underground
nuclear testing.'*” However, the Court made no reference to admissibility

M4" SGS v Philippines, ICSID Case No ARB/95/3, §§92-4, 154, 170.

M5" Thirlway, 1 Law and Procedure, 935-6; 2 Law and Procedure, 1179. For an earlier example,
see the Order made by the CAC] in Honduras v El Salvador and Guatemala (1909) 3 AJIL
729, 730, where an objection based on admissibility was dismissed on the basis of the
‘humanitarian and unquestionably utilitarian purpose’ for which the Court’s ability to
grant interim relief was included. Further: Chapter 2, $II.B.2(a).

M6 Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v France), ICJ Reports 1974 p 457, 477:

Once the Court has found that a State has entered into a commitment concerning its
future conduct it is not the Court’s function to contemplate that it will not comply with
it. However, the Court observes that if the basis of this Judgment were to be affected,
the Applicant could request an examination of the situation in accordance with the
provisions of the Statute; the denunciation by France, by letter dated 2 January 1974,
of the General Act for the Pacific Settlement of International disputes, which is relied
on as a basis of jurisdiction in the present case, cannot constitute by itself an obstacle
to the presentation of such a request.

47" Request for the Examination of the Situation in Accordance with Paragraph 63 of the Court’s
Judgment of 20 December 1974 in the Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v France) case (New

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae rt eN wnat
via ae fF ie ;
TOS VO OLOr ras #

PRIMA FACIE ADMISSIBILITY 165

in rejecting the request, leaving the relevant identification to be made by
Vice-President Schwebel.!48 At no point was reference made to a prima
facie standard of review.

An express acknowledgment of the standard came in Cameroon v Nige-
ria, where Nigeria argued that the presence of duty incumbent on the par-
ties to settle all boundary disputes via an alternative bilateral mechanism
rendered Cameroon’s claim prima facie inadmissible and thus frustrated
its request for interim relief. Although the Court did not agree with this
assessment, it acknowledged the need to address Nigeria’s concerns before
deciding whether to grant the measures requested.'” Similar acknowledg-
ments occurred in Armed Activities (DRC v Uganda)'°® and Obligation to
Prosecute or Extradite.'°! Reflecting the incorporation of this new element
into the Court’s practice, the ICJ has modified its customary incantation
as to the inability of conclusions drawn during the provisional measures
phase to prejudice further enquiries as to jurisdiction or the merits to
include considerations of admissibility.!*

Although the prima facie standard adopted vis-a-vis admissibility is
clearly based on the standard of review developed by the IC] with respect
to jurisdiction, it is difficult for further conclusions to be drawn from
the Court’s practice to date. In particular, it is uncertain whether the
Court considers prima facie admissibility to be an essential condition for
the award of interim relief, and thus whether it is to be considered one

Zealand v France), Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports 1995 p 288, 306 (ironically also in
$63).

48 Ibid, 309 (Vice-President Schwebel).

49 Cameroon v Nigeria, ICJ Reports 1996 p 13, 21. See further Ibid, 29 (Judge Ranjeva)
making reference to ‘a possible additional condition for the indication of provisional
measures, that is, the prima facie admissibility of the principal Application’. Further:
Jerzy Stucki, “Case Analysis: Case Concerning Land and Maritime Boundary (Cameroon v
Nigeria): Provisional Measures, Order of 15 March 1996 (1992) 2 LJIL 341, 346-7.

150 Armed Activities (DRC v Uganda), ICJ Reports 2000 p 111, 126. Cf. ibid, 131 (Judge Oda).

‘5! Obligation to Prosecute or Extradite, IC] Reports 2009 p 139, 144. Prima facie admissibility
may also have been a subject of consideration in LaGrand, had the extreme urgency of that
application not prevented the US from giving complete submissions on the point at the
provisional measures phase: ICJ Reports 1999 p 9, 22 (President Schwebel). Admissibility
was considered at length when the Court addressed the merits in full: LaGrand, ICJ
Reports 2001 p 466, 485-9, 548-57 (Judge Buergenthal, diss).

152 See e.g. Avena, ICJ Reports 2003 p 77, 91; Border Area, ICJ Reports 2011 p 6, 27:

nay

Whereas the decision given in the present proceedings in no way prejudges the question
of the jurisdiction of the Court to deal with the merits of the case or any questions
relating to the admissibility of the Application, or relating to the merits themselves;
and whereas it leaves unaffected the right of the [parties] to submit arguments in
respect of those questions [... ]

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
166 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

of the minimum features of the power to grant provisional measures in
international law. Although the Court stated in Cameroon v Nigeria that
it ‘must, before deciding whether to indicate such measures, ensure that
the application of which it is seised is admissible prima facie’,'*° it has not
acknowledged the prima facie admissibility of the application even in the
absence of a relevant preliminary objection, a position at odds with its
practice on prima facie jurisdiction.'™*

However, when considering the overall character of objections to
admissibility, it may be argued that a review of the concept is not an
essential feature of the power to award provisional measures in every
case. Unlike jurisdictional hurdles, preconditions to admissibility are not
ordinarily built into the framework that contextualizes state consent, ie.
the court or tribunal’s constituent instrument. As such, the court or tri-
bunal has a far greater level of discretion (to be exercised strictly) in
defining the scope of admissibility — as Rosenne has put it, the question
is not whether the court or tribunal may hear the dispute, but whether it
should hear the dispute.'°? But that is not to say that a review of admis-
sibility is not necessary where an objection is raised by the respondent; a
failure to examine such an objection prior to the granting of interim relief
would undoubtedly give rise to serious questions of legitimacy. What is
claimed here is only that a court or tribunal need not go out of its way to
review admissibility in the absence of a relevant objection.

C Prima Facie Admissibility in Other International
Courts and Tribunals

1 Dispute Settlement Under UNCLOS

Perhaps because it has been introduced to the jurisprudence of the ICJ rel-
atively recently, other international courts or tribunals have been slow to
incorporate considerations of prima facie admissibility into their practice
on provisional measures. In the UNCLOS context, this reluctance may
follow from problems of terminology. UNCLOS Article 283(1) provides
that, in the event of a dispute concerning the interpretation or application
of the Convention, the parties must ‘proceed expeditiously to an exchange
of views regarding its settlement by negotiation or other peaceful means’.

53 Cameroon v Nigeria, ICJ Reports 1996 p 13, 21.

154 See e.g. Border Area, ICJ Reports 2011 p 6, 18.

55 Rosenne, Jurisdiction and Admissibility, $2. See also Marion Unglaube and Reinhard
Unglaube v Costa Rica, ICSID Case Nos ARB/08/1 and ARB/09/20 (Award, 16 May 2012)
§281.

PSTS4T 8S 72.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
PRIMA FACIE ADMISSIBILITY 167

Non-fulfillment of this requirement has been regularly invoked as a pre-
liminary objection before ITLOS and Annex VII tribunals in relation to
jurisdiction, and has been considered as such in the context of interim
relief.!°° However, the fact that any deficiency in the requirement can
be corrected post-seisen indicates that, notwithstanding its presence in
UNCLOS, it might better be characterized as going to admissibility. As
such, Judge Paik in M/V Louisa considered Spain’s objection under Article
283(1) to be relevant to admissibility, but subsumed this discussion within
prima facie jurisdiction, remarking that “‘[a]nother procedural condition
that the Tribunal must examine in order to determine its prima facie
jurisdiction is whether the Applicant’s claim is admissible’.!°’ Conversely,
Judge Treves considered the requirements of Article 283(1) to be formally
separate from the Tribunal’s assessment of prima facie jurisdiction.’
Additional recent decisions may indicate that Judge Treves’ taxonomy
is gaining traction within ITLOS. In M/V Louisa, the Tribunal adopted
the ICJ’s expanded formula on the lack of prejudice to later inquiries
to include ‘questions related to the admissibility of the Application’'°?
In each of ARA Libertad, Arctic Sunrise and Enrica Lexie, the Tribunal
turned its attention to Article 283(1) only after it had reached the con-
clusion that it possessed prima facie jurisdiction, impliedly separating the
two.1©

Interestingly, however, to the extent that questions of admissibility are
asked and answered by ITLOS as part of the provisional measures calculus,
the Tribunal has not employed a reduced standard of review, but has rather
examined the requirements of Article 283(1) in full. It may be argued that
this is due to the ability of the Tribunal to establish that Article 283(1) has
been met with relative ease,!°! permitting a complete examination of the
point without risking further damage to rights pendente lite.

156 Southern Bluefin Tuna (1999) 117 ILR 148, 162; MOX Plant (2001) 126 ILR 260, 274-5;
Land Reclamation (2003) 126 ILR 487, 497-99; M/V Louisa (2010) 148 ILR 459, 469-70;
Arctic Sunrise, ITLOS Case No 22, §§$73-7. Further: Igor V Karaman, Dispute Resolution
in the Law of the Sea (Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff, 2012) 126-30. Annex VII tribunals have
characterized UNCLOS Art 283 as a ‘procedural’ objection to jurisdiction: Guyana v
Suriname (2007) 139 ILR 566, 683; Mauritius v UK, UNCLOS Annex VII (Award, 18
March 2015) $160.

57 M/V Louisa (2010) 148 ILR 459, 475 (Judge Paik). —'°* Ibid, 488-91 (Judge Treves).

159 Thid, 472. Cf. ARA Libertad (2012) 156 ILR 186, 205; Arctic Sunrise, ITLOS Case 22, $100,
where admissibility was again absent — however, both cases considered applications for
relief under UNCLOS Art 290(5).

160 ARA Libertad (2012) 156 ILR 186, 201; Arctic Sunrise, ITLOS Case No 22, §§72-7; Enrica
Lexie, ITLOS Case No 24, §$55-60.

16! Klein, Dispute Settlement in UNCLOS, 62-4.

ma

AOVETSTEdT Get s.c06 Published online by Cambridge University Press
168 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

2 Inter-State Arbitration

As with considerations of jurisdiction, no ad hoc inter-state arbitration
tribunal in the modern era has been faced with an application for pro-
visional measures in circumstances where the respondent has challenged
the admissibility of the main claim. Depending on the wording of the tri-
bunal’s power to award interim relief, however, it would not be untoward
for such a requirement to be introduced of the tribunal’s own motion.

3  Investor-State Arbitration

Despite the fact that the jurisprudence on admissibility is well developed,
no ICSID tribunal has as yet considered the concept as forming part of the
calculus on provisional measures. To an extent, the problem may simply
not yet have arisen, with no tribunal having been called upon to award
interim relief in the face of an unresolved objection to admissibility.‘
However, to the extent that a tribunal was minded to acknowledge the
validity of objections to admissibility as a category independent of juris-
diction, then it would be difficult to conceive of a situation in which such
an objection could be ignored in the context of provisional measures,
especially given the influence wielded over ICSID jurisprudence by the
ICJ. In such a case, the likely outcome would be the adoption of the ICJ’s
prima facie admissibility standard. It follows from this that if the ICSID
tribunal decides to hear an objection to jurisdiction alongside the merits,
the prima facie requirement will be deemed satisfied for the purpose of
provisional measures.

A different outcome might occur with respect to an investor-state arbi-
tration conducted under the UNCITRAL Rules. As noted by the Tribunal
in Chevron v Ecuador, the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules contain no equivalent
to Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Rules, which permits the raising of a general
objection that a claim is manifestly without legal merit, which covers
considerations of admissibility. As such, objections to admissibility — to
the extent that they cannot be considered to overlap with objections to
jurisdiction — must be seen as relating to the merits.!* As this omission
has not been remedied in the 2010 Rules, the same conclusion presumably
follows. A similar outcome would likely arise before an ICSID tribunal

162 Cf. Abaclat and Ors v Argentina, ICSID Case No ARB/07/5 (Procedural Order No 11, 27
June 2012), where questions ofjurisdiction and admissibility had already been determined
finally via the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of 4 August 2011.

‘63 Chevron v Ecuador, PCA Case No 2009-23 (Third Interim Award on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, 27 February 2012) $4.91, referring to Arts 15 and 21 of the 1976 Rules.

PSTS4T 8S 72.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
ADMISSIBILITY OF THE APPLICATION PROPER 169

that refused to acknowledge admissibility as a separate category of prelim-
inary objection — though these are increasingly rare. Accordingly, insofar
as provisional measures are concerned, what might otherwise be consid-
ered an objection to admissibility is either subsumed within the Tribunal’s
prima facie analysis of its jurisdiction or the merits.'°4

VI Admissibility of the Application for Provisional Measures Proper

A separate but related consideration is the admissibility for the application
for interim relief itself. Whilst, provided the court or tribunal has been
separately seised with a primary proceeding, its jurisdiction to award
interim relief arises more or less automatically as a general principle or
inherent power, the same does not automatically follow with respect to
admissibility.

In most cases, inadmissibility with respect to a provisional measures
application will arise due to the failure by the party seeking relief to comply
with the court or tribunal’s requirements of form regarding interim relief
in its application, e.g. a failure to state the reasons that provisional mea-
sures are required, or the consequences if they are not granted per Article
73(2) of the ICJ Statute. But such procedural defects are easily remedied
through the amendment of the request for relief and in any event most
courts are reluctant to attribute significance to formal matters.‘

A more significant basis for inadmissibility in cases of provisional mea-
sures arises where another tribunal, separately seized, has the capacity to
award interim relief with respect to the primary claim. This occurred in
the Certain Documents and Data case between Timor-Leste and Australia.
Stated briefly, a dispute arose between the parties concerning hydrocarbon
entitlements in the Timor Strait. Timor-Leste then commenced confiden-
tial arbitration under the auspices of the PCA pursuant to Article 23(b)
and Annex B of the Timor Sea Treaty (TST).!®° The parties based their
procedure on the PCA Optional Rules, and included a provision based on
Article 26 thereof. Shortly after the rules were agreed, Australian intelli-
gence officers raided the office of the Canberra solicitor who was acting
for Timor-Leste, and seized certain documents and data relating to the

‘64 Paushok v Mongolia, UNCITRAL, $45, referring to prima facie jurisdiction (but not

admissibility) and the prima facie establishment of the case as two of the ‘internationally
recognized’ prerequisites for the grant of provisional measures.

165 See e.g. Northern Cameroons, ICJ Reports 1963 p 15, 27-8, 42—3 (Judge Wellington Koo),
172-4 (Judge Bustamante, diss). Further: Brownlie’s Principles, 701.

166 Timor Sea Treaty, 20 May 2002, [2003] ATS 13.

PSTS4T 8S 72.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
eae Yaalars fin i
LOS VO OLOTA TA To

170 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

arbitration, including legal advice. Australia, for its part, claimed that the
raid was underpinned by national security concerns.

Given the risk that the material could be turned over to Australia’s
lawyers, the seizure clearly prejudiced Timor-Leste’s ability to successfully
prosecute the TST proceedings. Rather than seek provisional measures
from the TST tribunal for the return or sequestration of the documents,
however, Timor-Leste commenced proceedings under the optional clause
jurisdiction of the ICJ, claiming that the raid violated rights connected
with state property and legal privilege arising under customary interna-
tional law and ‘any relevant domestic law.!®” Due to the lack of a formal
overlap ratione materiae between the TST and IC] proceedings, no protest
on the basis of lis pedens could be made,'** but Australia raised broader
concerns as to the probity of the Court ordering interim relief in the
following terms:

[E]ven if [the ICJ] prima facie retains concurrent jurisdiction, notwith-
standing the agreement of the parties to specific modalities of dispute
settlement under the [TST], [...] jurisdiction should not be exercised
at that stage, having regard to the pending proceedings elsewhere. A
rigid adherence to the parallelism of jurisdictions will only encourage
forum shopping, conflict and fragmentation, unduly favouring successive
claimants. [...] [T]his is just the sort of jurisdictional jockeying which
would discredit the international dispute settlement system and which this
Court would not want to see other tribunals engage in, or to engage in
itself.'

The principle relied on by Australia in this respect was that of
comity between international courts and tribunals. Drawn from private
international law,'’° comity broadly relates to ‘the recognition which one
nation allows within its territory to the legislative, executive or judicial
acts of another nation, having due regard both to international duty and
convenience, and to the rights of its own citizens or other persons who
are under the protection of its law.'”' As for an international precedent,

167
168

Certain Documents and Data, Timor-Leste: Application, 17 December 2013, $10.

And at any rate, no firm doctrine of lis pedens may be said to exist in international law
at the present time: Certain German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia (Germany v Poland)
(1925) PCIJ Ser A No 6, 18-20, 26-7. Further: Yuval Shany, The Competing Jurisdictions
of International Courts and Tribunals (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003)
239-45,

169 CR 2014/2, §24 (Crawford).

70 See e.g. Richard Fentiman, International Commercial Litigation (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2010) 579-86.

“1 Morguard v De Savoye [1990] 3 SCR 1077, 1096, citing Hilton v Cuyot, 159 US 113 (1895).

ny

VPISYETSTSAT 7 5.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
CONCLUSIONS 171

the Annex VII tribunal in MOX Plant stayed its jurisdiction in favour
of the European Court of Justice, firstly out of respect to the Court, but
also because ‘a procedure that might result in two conflicting decisions
on the same issue would not be helpful to the resolution of the dispute
between the Parties.'”? In a similar vein, Australia argued, it would be
inappropriate for the ICJ to award interim relief in a matter that was
properly within the competence of another, better informed tribunal and
with respect to which the ICJ possessed no express power to act on that
tribunal’s behalf.'”°? As such, Timor-Leste’s request for provisional mea-
sures was inadmissible and the proceedings should be stayed until such a
time as the TST tribunal had concluded its deliberations.

The Court did not agree with this submission, but nonetheless acknowl-
edged the validity of the underlying argument, holding that, notwith-
standing the operation of the TST tribunal, the Court considered ‘that
the dispute [in Certain Documents and Data] is sufficiently distinct from
the dispute being adjudicated upon by the Arbitral Tribunal’.!”*4 Exactly
what might have been considered insufficiently distinct was not elabo-
rated upon, but the threshold may be thought to fall somewhere between
the total subject matter overlap that confronted the Annex VII tribunal in
MOX Plant and the situation in Certain Documents and Data, which con-
sidered only issues arising from a dispute that was within the competence
of another tribunal.

VII Conclusions

This chapter has endeavoured to deal with some of the less controversial
elements of the uniform approach to provisional measures as between
international courts and tribunals. Within the adjudicatory bodies under
consideration, there appears to be agreement that an international court
or tribunal has the inherent power to award provisional measures, and
that this power underpins and may be displaced by an express provision

"72 MOX Plant (Annex VII) (2002) 126 ILR 314, 318-20. Further: Shany, Competing Jurisdic-
tions, 200-6; Caroline Henckels, ‘Overcoming Jurisdictional Isolationism at the WTO-
FTA Nexus: A Potential Approach for the WTO’ (2008) 19 EJIL 571; James Crawford,
“Chance, Order, Change: The Course of International Law (2013) 365 Hague Recueil 9,
221-4.

3 CR 2014/2, §§25-33 (Crawford).

“4 Certain Documents and Data, ICJ, Order of 28 January 2014, 2, reaffirmed in the Order
of 3 March 2014, $17. For a rejection of the underlying premise of the submission, see
ibid, §$6-12 (Judge Cancado Trindade).

PSTS4T 8S 72.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
172 POWER TO ORDER PROVISIONAL MEASURES

in the relevant body’s constituent instrument (lex specialis). The precise
character of the inherent power is less certain: does it arise from the court
or tribunal’s need to ensure the effectiveness of its jurisdiction, or does
it reflect a general (procedural) principle of international law, within the
meaning of Article 38(1)(c) of the ICJ Statute? In the author’s view, the
better position is the latter, rooted as it is within the cognizable sources
of international law. As a practical matter, however, the question takes on
a lesser degree of relevance: the important point is that the power exists
and is widely recognized as such.

Insofar as more specific aspects of the uniform approach are concerned,
despite some initial debate within the ICJ it has now been universally
accepted — not only within the Court, but before other international bod-
ies — that an essential prerequisite of interim relief is the establishment
of jurisdiction vis-a-vis the main dispute on a prima facie basis. There
is no particular reason, as a matter of logic or principle, why this needs
to be precise threshold, but it is adopted nonetheless more or less auto-
matically, the sheer weight of the jurisprudence constante being such that
the contemplation of any alternative would require a very good reason
indeed (i.e. a lex specialis). For now, however, the need for prima facie
jurisdiction is the most uniform element of the uniform approach.

International courts and tribunals have been generally less enthusiastic
when adopting a newer innovation of the ICJ, being prima facie admis-
sibility. The fact that objections to admissibility do not usually go to the
consent-based root of an international court or tribunal’s adjudicative
power — along with the fact that most defects of this kind can be cured
post-seisen (i.e. after the application for interim relief but before the hear-
ing on the merits) — may play a role in this reluctance. At the same time,
however, the problem may be party-led: if, for example, a submission
were put to an UNCLOS Part XV body or investor-state arbitration tri-
bunal that an application for interim relief was barred by reason of a lack
prima facie admissibility, the body or tribunal in question would need to
consider the issue on those terms, and determine whether it was a valid
obstruction to provisional measures.

A final consideration is the admissibility of the application for interim
relief itself. The IC] in Certain Documents and Data was willing to consider
the issue a live one — even if it ultimately decided that it did not apply in the
circumstances before it. Given the somewhat unique situation in which
the Court found itself in that case, one might wonder whether that was
the only opportunity that this particular watchdog had to bark — though

PSTS4T 8S 72.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
CONCLUSIONS 173

nothing can be excluded in a world of increasingly fragmented interna-
tional courts and tribunals. All that can be said is that these episodes
demonstrate the ways in which provisional measures might interact with
wider questions of international procedure,'”? and the need for parties
and adjudicators to keep in mind the broader implications of interim
relief as a common procedural device.

“5 Cf. Chapter 8, SII.

VPISYETSTSAT 7 5.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
